<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>An Essay In Aid Of A Grammar Of Assent</title>
      <author><name reg="Newman, John Henry">John Henry Newman</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>October 1, 2010</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">34022</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2010-10-01">October 1, 2010</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Delphine Lettau, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">An Essay</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">In Aid Of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">A Grammar Of Assent.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">by</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">John Henry Newman,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Of the Oratory.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Non in dialecticà complacuit Deo salvum facere populum suum.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center"><hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Ambrose</hi>.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London:</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Burns, Oates, &amp; Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">17 &amp; 18, Portman Street, and 63, Paternoster Row.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1874</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='i'/><anchor id='Pgi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<head>Dedication.</head>

<p>
To
</p>

<p>
Edward Bellasis,
</p>

<p>
Serjeant At Law,
</p>

<p>
In Remembrance
</p>

<p>
Of A Long, Equable, Sunny Friendship;
</p>

<p>
In Gratitude
</p>

<p>
For Continual Kindnesses Shown To Me,
</p>

<p>
For An Unwearied Zeal In My Behalf,
</p>

<p>
For A Trust In Me Which Has Never Wavered,
</p>

<p>
And A Prompt, Effectual Succour And Support
</p>

<p>
In Times Of Special Trial,
</p>

<p>
From His Affectionate
</p>

<p>
J. H. N.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>February 21, 1870.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part I. Assent And Apprehension.</head>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Modes Of Holding And Apprehending Propositions.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 1. Modes of Holding Propositions.</head>

<p>
1. Propositions (consisting of a subject and predicate
united by the copula) may take a categorical, conditional,
or interrogative form.
</p>

<p>
(1) An interrogative, when they ask a Question,
(e. g. Does Free-trade benefit the poorer classes?) and
imply the possibility of an affirmative or negative
resolution of it.
</p>

<p>
(2) A conditional, when they express a Conclusion
(e. g. Free-trade therefore benefits the poorer classes),
and both imply, and imply their dependence on, other
propositions.
</p>

<p>
(3) A categorical, when they simply make an Assertion
(e. g. Free-trade does benefit), and imply the
absence of any condition or reservation of any kind,
looking neither before nor behind, as resting in themselves
and being intrinsically complete.
</p>

<p>
These three modes of shaping a proposition, distinct
as they are from each other, follow each other in natural
sequence. A proposition, which starts with being a
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
Question, may become a Conclusion, and then be changed
into an Assertion; but it has of course ceased to be a
question, so far forth as it has become a conclusion, and
has rid itself of its argumentative form&mdash;that is, has
ceased to be a conclusion,&mdash;so far forth as it has become
an assertion. A question has not yet got so far as to
be a conclusion, though it is the necessary preliminary
of a conclusion; and an assertion has got beyond being
a mere conclusion, though it is the natural issue of a
conclusion. Their correlation is the measure of their
distinction one from another.
</p>

<p>
No one is likely to deny that a question is distinct
both from a conclusion and from an assertion; and an
assertion will be found to be equally distinct from a
conclusion. For, if we rest our affirmation on arguments,
this shows that we are not asserting; and, when
we assert, we do not argue. An assertion is as distinct
from a conclusion, as a word of command is from a persuasion
or recommendation. Command and assertion,
as such, both of them, in their different ways, dispense
with, discard, ignore, antecedents of any kind, though
antecedents may have been a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sine
quâ non</foreign> condition of
their being elicited. They both carry with them the
pretension of being personal acts.
</p>

<p>
In insisting on the intrinsic distinctness of these
three modes of putting a proposition, I am not maintaining
that they may not co-exist as regards one and
the same subject. For what we have already concluded,
we may, if we will, make a question of; and what we
are asserting, we may of course conclude over again.
We may assert, to one man, and conclude to another,
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
and ask of a third; still, when we assert, we do not
conclude, and, when we assert or conclude, we do not
question.
</p>

<p>
2. The internal act of holding propositions is for the
most part analogous to the external act of enunciating
them; as there are three ways of enunciating, so are
there three ways of holding them, each corresponding
to each. These three mental acts are Doubt, Inference,
and Assent. A question is the expression of a doubt;
a conclusion is the expression of an act of inference;
and an assertion is the expression of an act of assent.
To doubt, for instance, is not to see one's way to hold
that Free-trade is or that it is not a benefit; to infer,
is to hold on sufficient grounds that Free-trade may,
must, or should be a benefit; to assent to the proposition,
is to hold that Free-trade is a benefit.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, propositions, while they are the material of
these three enunciations, are the objects of the three
corresponding mental acts; and as without a proposition,
there cannot be a question, conclusion, or assertion, so
without a proposition there is nothing to doubt about,
nothing to infer, nothing to assent to. Mental acts of
whatever kind presuppose their objects.
</p>

<p>
And, since the three enunciations are distinct from
each other, therefore the three mental acts also, Doubt,
Inference, and Assent, are, with reference to one and
the same proposition, distinct from each other; else,
why should their several enunciations be distinct?
And indeed it is very evident, that, so far forth as
we infer, we do not doubt, and that, when we assent,
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
we are not inferring, and, when we doubt, we cannot
assent.
</p>

<p>
And in fact, these three modes of entertaining propositions,&mdash;doubting
them, inferring them, assenting to
them, are so distinct in their action, that, when they
are severally carried out into the intellectual habits of
an individual, they become the principles and notes of
three distinct states or characters of mind. For instance,
in the case of Revealed Religion, according as one or
other of these is paramount within him, a man is a
sceptic as regards it; or a philosopher, thinking it more
or less probable considered as a conclusion of reason; or
he has an unhesitating faith in it, and is recognized as
a believer. If he simply disbelieves, or dissents, he is
assenting to the contradictory of the thesis, viz. that
there is no Revelation.
</p>

<p>
Many minds of course there are, which are not under
the predominant influence of any one of the three. Thus
men are to be found of irreflective, impulsive, unsettled,
or again of acute minds, who do not know what they
believe and what they do not, and who may be by turns
sceptics, inquirers, or believers; who doubt, assent, infer,
and doubt again, according to the circumstances of the
season. Nay further, in all minds there is a certain coexistence
of these distinct acts; that is, of two of them,
for we can at once infer and assent, though we cannot at
once either assent or infer and also doubt. Indeed, in
a multitude of cases we infer truths, or apparent truths,
before, and while, and after we assent to them.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, it cannot be denied that these three acts are
all natural to the mind; I mean, that, in exercising
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
them, we are not violating the laws of our nature, as
if they were in themselves an extravagance or weakness,
but are acting according to it, according to its legitimate
constitution. Undoubtedly, it is possible, it is
common, in the particular case, to err in the exercise of
Doubt, of Inference, and of Assent; that is, we may be
withholding a judgment about propositions on which
we have the means of coming to some definitive conclusion;
or we may be assenting to propositions which we
ought to receive only on the credit of their premisses,
or again to keep ourselves in suspense about; but such
errors of the individual belong to the individual, not to
his nature, and cannot avail to forfeit for him his natural
right, under proper circumstances, to doubt, or to infer,
or to assent. We do but fulfil our nature in doubting,
inferring, and assenting; and our duty is, not to abstain
from the exercise of any function of our nature, but to
do what is in itself right rightly.
</p>

<p>
3. So far in general:&mdash;in this Essay I treat of propositions
only in their bearing upon concrete matter,
and I am mainly concerned with Assent; with Inference,
in its relation to Assent, and only such inference
as is not demonstration; with Doubt hardly at all. I
dismiss Doubt with one observation. I have here spoken
of it simply as a suspense of mind, in which sense of the
word, to have <q>no doubt</q> about a thesis is equivalent
to one or other of the two remaining acts, either to
inferring it or else assenting to it. However, the word
is often taken to mean the deliberate recognition of a
thesis as being uncertain; in this sense Doubt is nothing
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
else than an assent, viz. an assent to a proposition
at variance with the thesis, as I have already noticed
in the case of Disbelief.
</p>

<p>
Confining myself to the subject of Assent and Inference,
I observe two points of contrast between
them.
</p>

<p>
The first I have already noted. Assent is unconditional;
else, it is not really represented by assertion.
Inference is conditional, because a conclusion at least
implies the assumption of premisses, and still more,
because in concrete matter, on which I am engaged,
demonstration is impossible.
</p>

<p>
The second has regard to the apprehension necessary
for holding a proposition. We cannot assent to a proposition,
without some intelligent apprehension of it;
whereas we need not understand it at all in order to
infer it. We cannot give our assent to the proposition
that <q>x is z,</q> till we are told something about one or
other of the terms; but we can infer, if <q>x is y, and
y is z, that x is z,</q> whether we know the meaning of
x and z or no.
</p>

<p>
These points of contrast and their results will come
before us in due course: here, for a time leaving the
consideration of the modes of holding propositions, I
proceed to inquire into what is to be understood by
apprehending them.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 2. Modes of apprehending Propositions.</head>

<p>
By our apprehension of propositions I mean our imposition
of a sense on the terms of which they are composed.
Now what do the terms of a proposition, the subject and
predicate, stand for? Sometimes they stand for certain
ideas existing in our own minds, and for nothing
outside of them; sometimes for things simply external
to us, brought home to us through the experiences and
informations we have of them. All things in the exterior
world are unit and individual, and are nothing else; but
the mind not only contemplates those unit realities, as
they exist, but has the gift, by an act of creation, of
bringing before it abstractions and generalizations, which
have no existence, no counterpart, out of it.
</p>

<p>
Now there are propositions, in which one or both of
the terms are common nouns, as standing for what is
abstract, general, and non-existing, such as <q>Man is an
animal, some men are learned, an Apostle is a creation
of Christianity, a line is length without breadth, to err
is human, to forgive divine.</q> These I shall call notional
propositions, and the apprehension with which we infer
or assent to them, notional.
</p>

<p>
And there are other propositions, which are composed
of singular nouns, and of which the terms stand for
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
things external to us, unit and individual, as <q>Philip
was the father of Alexander,</q> <q>the earth goes round
the sun,</q> <q>the Apostles first preached to the Jews;</q>
and these I shall call real propositions, and their apprehension
real.
</p>

<p>
There are then two apprehensions or interpretations
to which propositions may be subjected, notional and
real.
</p>

<p>
Next I observe, that the same proposition may admit
of both of these interpretations at once, having a notional
sense as used by one man, and a real as used by another.
Thus a schoolboy may perfectly apprehend, and construe
with spirit, the poet's words, <q>Dum Capitolium scandet
cum tacitâ Virgine Pontifex;</q> he has seen steep hills,
flights of steps, and processions; he knows what enforced
silence is; also he knows all about the Pontifex Maximus,
and the Vestal Virgins; he has an abstract hold
upon every word of the description, yet without the
words therefore bringing before him at all the living
image which they would light up in the mind of a contemporary
of the poet, who had seen the fact described,
or of a modern historian who had duly informed himself
in the religious phenomena, and by meditation had
realized the Roman ceremonial, of the age of Augustus.
Again, <q>Dulce et decorum est pro patriâ mori,</q> is a
mere common-place, a terse expression of abstractions
in the mind of the poet himself, if Philippi is to be the
index of his patriotism, whereas it would be the record
of experiences, a sovereign dogma, a grand aspiration,
inflaming the imagination, piercing the heart, of a
Wallace or a Tell.
</p>

<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>

<p>
As the multitude of common nouns have originally
been singular, it is not surprising that many of them
should so remain still in the apprehension of particular
individuals. In the proposition <q>Sugar is sweet,</q> the
predicate is a common noun as used by those who have
compared sugar in their thoughts with honey or glycerine;
but it may be the only distinctively sweet thing
in the experience of a child, and may be used by him as
a noun singular. The first time that he tastes sugar, if
his nurse says, <q>Sugar is sweet</q> in a notional sense,
meaning by sugar, lump-sugar, powdered, brown, and
candied, and by sweet, a specific flavour or scent which
is found in many articles of food and many flowers, he
may answer in a real sense, and in an individual proposition
<q>Sugar is sweet,</q> meaning <q>this sugar is this
sweet thing.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thirdly, in the same mind and at the same time, the
same proposition may express both what is notional and
what is real. When a lecturer in mechanics or chemistry
shows to his class by experiment some physical fact, he
and his hearers at once enunciate it as an individual
thing before their eyes, and also as generalized by their
minds into a law of nature. When Virgil says, <q>Varium
et mutabile semper fœmina,</q> he both sets before his
readers what he means to be a general truth, and at the
same time applies it individually to the instance of Dido.
He expresses at once a notion and a fact.
</p>

<p>
Of these two modes of apprehending propositions, notional
and real, real is the stronger; I mean by stronger
the more vivid and forcible. It is so to be accounted
for the very reason that it is concerned with what is
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
either real or taken for real; for intellectual ideas
cannot compete in effectiveness with the experience of
concrete facts. Various proverbs and maxims sanction
me in so speaking, such as, <q>Facts are stubborn things,</q>
<q>Experientia docet,</q> <q>Seeing is believing;</q> and the
popular contrast between theory and practice, reason and
sight, philosophy and faith. Not that real apprehension,
as such, impels to action, any more than notional;
but it excites and stimulates the affections and passions,
by bringing facts home to them as motive causes. Thus
it indirectly brings about what the apprehension of large
principles, of general laws, or of moral obligations, never
could effect.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Reverting to the two modes of holding propositions,
conditional and unconditional, which was the subject of
the former Section, that is, inferences and assents, I
observe that inferences, which are conditional acts, are
especially cognate to notional apprehension, and assents,
which are unconditional, to real. This distinction, too,
will come before us in the course of the following
chapters.
</p>

<p>
And now I have stated the main subjects of which I
propose to treat; viz., the distinctions in the use of propositions,
which I have been drawing, and the questions
which those distinctions involve.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Assent Considered As Apprehensive.</head>

<p>
I have already said of an act of Assent, first, that it is
in itself the absolute acceptance of a proposition without
any condition; and next that, in order to its being made,
it presupposes the condition, not only of some previous
inference in favour of the proposition, but especially of
some concomitant apprehension of its terms. I proceed
to the latter of these two subjects; that is, of Assent
considered as apprehensive, leaving the discussion of
Assent as unconditional for a later place in this Essay.
</p>

<p>
By apprehension of a proposition, I mean, as I have
already said, the interpretation given to the terms of
which it is composed. When we infer, we consider a
proposition in relation to other propositions; when we
assent to it, we consider it for its own sake and in its
intrinsic sense. That sense must be in some degree
known to us; else, we do but assert the proposition, we
in no wise assent to it. Assent I have described to be
a mental assertion; in its very nature then it is of the
mind, and not of the lips. We can assert without
assenting; assent is more than assertion just by this
much, that it is accompanied by some apprehension of
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
the matter asserted. This is plain; and the only question
is, what measure of apprehension is sufficient.
</p>

<p>
And the answer to this question is equally plain:&mdash;it
is the predicate of the proposition which must be apprehended.
In a proposition one term is predicated of
another; the subject is referred to the predicate, and the
predicate gives us information about the subject;&mdash;therefore
to apprehend the proposition is to have that information,
and to assent to it is to acquiesce in it as true.
Therefore I apprehend a proposition, when I apprehend
its predicate. The subject itself need not be apprehended
<hi rend='italic'>per se</hi> in order to a genuine assent: for it is the very
thing which the predicate has to elucidate, and therefore
by its formal place in the proposition, so far as it is the
subject, it is something unknown, something which the
predicate makes known; but the predicate cannot make
it known, unless it is known itself. Let the question
be, <q>What is Trade?</q> here is a distinct profession of
ignorance about <q>Trade;</q> and let the answer be, <q>Trade
is the interchange of goods;</q>&mdash;trade then need not be
known, as a condition of assent to the proposition, except
so far as the account of it which is given in answer,
<q>the interchange of goods,</q> makes it known; and
that must be apprehended in order to make it known.
The very drift of the proposition is to tell us something
about the subject; but there is no reason why our knowledge
of the subject, whatever it is, should go beyond
what the predicate tells us about it. Further than this
the subject need not be apprehended: as far as this it
must; it will not be apprehended thus far, unless we
apprehend the predicate.
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
If a child asks, <q>What is Lucern?</q> and is answered,
<q>Lucern is medicago sativa, of the class Diadelphia and
order Decandria;</q> and henceforth says obediently, <q>Lucern
is medicago sativa, &amp;c.,</q> he makes no act of assent
to the proposition which he enunciates, but speaks like
a parrot. But, if he is told, <q>Lucern is food for cattle,</q>
and is shown cows grazing in a meadow, then though
he never saw lucern, and knows nothing at all about it,
besides what he has learned from the predicate, he is in
a position to make as genuine an assent to the proposition
<q>Lucern is food for cattle,</q> on the word of his informant,
as if he knew ever so much more about lucern.
And as soon as he has got as far as this, he may go
further. He now knows enough about lucern, to enable
him to apprehend propositions which have lucern for
their predicate, should they come before him for assent,
as, <q>That field is sown with lucern,</q> or <q>Clover is not
lucern.</q>
</p>

<p>
Yet there is a way, in which the child can give an indirect
assent even to a proposition, in which he understood
neither subject nor predicate. He cannot indeed
in that case assent to the proposition itself, but he can
assent to its truth. He cannot do more than assert that
<q>Lucern is medicago sativa,</q> but he can assent to the
proposition, <q>That lucern is medicago sativa is true.</q>
For here is a predicate which he sufficiently apprehends,
what is inapprehensible in the proposition being confined
to the subject. Thus the child's mother might teach
him to repeat a passage of Shakespeare, and when he
asked the meaning of a particular line, such as <q>The
quality of mercy is not strained,</q> or <q>Virtue itself turns
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
vice, being misapplied,</q> she might answer him, that he
was too young to understand it yet, but that it had a
beautiful meaning, as he would one day know: and he,
in faith on her word, might give his assent to such a
proposition,&mdash;not, that is, to the line itself which he had
got by heart, and which would be beyond him, but to
its being true, beautiful, and good.
</p>

<p>
Of course I am speaking of assent itself, and its intrinsic
conditions, not of the ground or motive of it. Whether
there is an obligation upon the child to trust his mother,
or whether there are cases where such trust is impossible,
are irrelevant questions, and I notice them in
order to put them aside. I am examining the act of
assent itself, not its preliminaries, and I have specified
three directions, which among others the assent may
take, viz. assent immediately to a proposition, assent to
its truth, and assent both to its truth and to the ground
of its being true together,&mdash;<q>Lucern is food for cattle,</q>&mdash;<q>That
lucern is medicago sativa is true,</q>&mdash;and <q>My
mother's word, that lucern is medicago sativa, and is
food for cattle, is the truth.</q> Now in each of these
there is one and the same absolute adhesion of the mind
to the proposition, on the part of the child; he assents
to the apprehensible proposition, and to the truth of the
inapprehensible, and to the veracity of his mother in her
assertion of the inapprehensible. I say the same absolute
adhesion, because, unless he did assent without any
reserve to the proposition that lucern was food for cattle,
or to the accuracy of the botanical name and description
of it, he would not be giving an unreserved assent to his
mother's word: yet, though these assents are all unreserved,
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
still they certainly differ in strength, and this is
the next point to which I wish to draw attention. It is
indeed plain, that, though the child assents to his
mother's veracity, without perhaps being conscious of
his own act, nevertheless that particular assent of his
has a force and life in it which the other assents have
not, insomuch as he apprehends the proposition, which
is the subject of it, with greater keenness and energy
than belongs to his apprehension of the others. Her
veracity and authority is to him no abstract truth or item
of general knowledge, but is bound up with that image
and love of her person which is part of himself, and
makes a direct claim on him for his summary assent to
her general teachings.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, by reason of this circumstance of his
apprehension he would not hesitate to say, did his years
admit of it, that he would lay down his life in defence
of his mother's veracity. On the other hand, he would
not make such a profession in the case of the propositions,
<q>Lucern is food for cattle,</q> or <q>That lucern is
medicago sativa is true;</q> and yet it is clear too, that,
if he did in truth assent to these propositions, he would
have to die for them also, rather than deny them, when
it came to the point, unless he made up his mind to tell
a falsehood. That he would have to die for all three
propositions severally rather than deny them, shows the
completeness and absoluteness of assent in its very
nature; that he would not spontaneously challenge so
severe a trial in the case of two out of the three particular
acts of assent, illustrates in what sense one assent
may be stronger than another.
</p>

<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>

<p>
It appears then, that, in assenting to propositions, an
apprehension in some sense of their terms is not only
necessary to assent, as such, but also gives a distinct
character to its acts. If therefore we would know more
about Assent, we must know more about the apprehension
which accompanies it. Accordingly to the subject
of Apprehension I proceed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Apprehension Of Propositions.</head>

<p>
I said in my Introductory Chapter that there can be
no assent to a proposition, without some sort of apprehension
of its terms; next that there are two modes of
apprehension, notional and real; thirdly, that, while
assent may be given to a proposition on either apprehension
of it, still its acts are elicited more heartily and
forcibly, when they are made upon real apprehension
which has things for its objects, than when they are
made in favour of notions and with a notional apprehension.
The first of these three points I have just been
discussing; now I will proceed to the second, viz. the
two modes of apprehending propositions, leaving the
third for the Chapters which follow.
</p>

<p>
I have used the word <emph>apprehension</emph>, and not <emph>understanding</emph>,
because the latter word is of uncertain meaning,
standing sometimes for the faculty or act of
conceiving a proposition, sometimes for that of comprehending
it, neither of which come into the sense of
<emph>apprehension</emph>. It is possible to apprehend without understanding.
I apprehend what is meant by saying
that John is Richard's wife's father's aunt's husband,
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
but, if I am unable so to take in these successive relationships
as to understand the upshot of the whole, viz.
that John is great-uncle-in-law to Richard, I cannot be
said to understand the proposition. In like manner, I
may take a just view of a man's conduct, and therefore
apprehend it, and yet may profess that I cannot understand
it; that is, I have not the key to it, and do not
see its consistency in detail: I have no just conception
of it. Apprehension then is simply an intelligent acceptance
of the idea or of the fact which a proposition
enunciates. <q>Pride will have a fall;</q> <q>Napoleon died
at St. Helena;</q> I have no difficulty in entering into
the sentiment contained in the former of these, or into
the fact declared in the latter; that is, I apprehend
them both.
</p>

<p>
Now apprehension, as I have said, has two subject-matters:&mdash;according
as language expresses things external
to us, or our own thoughts, so is apprehension
real or notional. It is notional in the grammarian, it
is real in the experimentalist. The grammarian has to
determine the force of words and phrases; he has to
master the structure of sentences and the composition of
paragraphs; he has to compare language with language,
to ascertain the common ideas expressed under different
idiomatic forms, and to achieve the difficult work of recasting
the mind of an original author in the mould of
a translation. On the other hand, the philosopher or
experimentalist aims at investigating, questioning, ascertaining
facts, causes, effects, actions, qualities: these
are things, and he makes his words distinctly subordinate
to these, as means to an end. The primary duty of
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
a literary man is to have clear conceptions, and to be
exact and intelligible in expressing them; but in a
philosopher it is even a merit to be not altogether
vague, inchoate and obscure in his teaching, and if he
fails even of this low standard of language, we remind
ourselves that his obscurity perhaps is owing to his
depth. No power of words in a lecturer would be sufficient
to make psychology easy to his hearers; if they
are to profit by him, they must throw their minds into
the matters in discussion, must accompany his treatment
of them with an active, personal concurrence, and interpret
for themselves, as he proceeds, the dim suggestions
and adumbrations of objects, which he has a right to
presuppose, while he uses them, as images existing in
their apprehension as well as in his own.
</p>

<p>
In something of a parallel way it is the least pardonable
fault in an Orator to fail in clearness of style, and
the most pardonable fault of a Poet.
</p>

<p>
So again, an Economist is dealing with facts; whatever
there is of theory in his work professes to be
founded on facts, by facts alone must his sense be interpreted,
and to those only who are well furnished with
the necessary facts does he address himself; yet a clever
schoolboy, from a thorough grammatical knowledge of
both languages, might turn into English a French treatise
on national wealth, produce, consumption, labour,
profits, measures of value, public debt, and the circulating
medium, with an apprehension of what it was
that his author was stating sufficient for making it clear
to an English reader, while he had not the faintest conception
himself what the treatise, which he was translating
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
really determined. The man uses language as the
vehicle of things, and the boy of abstractions.
</p>

<p>
Hence in literary examinations, it is a test of good
scholarship to be able to construe aright, without the
aid of understanding the sentiment, action, or historical
occurrence conveyed in the passage thus accurately rendered,
let it be a battle in Livy, or some subtle train of
thought in Virgil or Pindar. And those who have
acquitted themselves best in the trial, will often be disposed
to think they have most notably failed, for the
very reason that they have been too busy with the grammar
of each sentence, as it came, to have been able, as
they construed on, to enter into the facts or the feelings,
which, unknown to themselves, they were bringing out
of it.
</p>

<p>
To take a very different instance of this contrast between
notions and facts;&mdash;pathology and medicine, in
the interests of science, and as a protection to the practitioner,
veil the shocking realities of disease and physical
suffering under a notional phraseology, under the abstract
terms of debility, distress, irritability, paroxysm, and a
host of Greek and Latin words. The arts of medicine
and surgery are necessarily experimental; but for writing
and conversing on these subjects they require to be
stripped of the association of the facts from which they
are derived.
</p>

<p>
Such are the two modes of apprehension. The terms
of a proposition do or do not stand for things. If they
do, then they are singular terms, for all things that are,
are units. But if they do not stand for things they must
stand for notions, and are common terms. Singular
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
nouns come from experience, common from abstraction.
The apprehension of the former I call real, and of the
latter notional. Now let us look at this difference between
them more narrowly.
</p>

<p>
1. Real Apprehension, is, as I have said, in the first
instance an experience or information about the concrete.
Now, when these informations are in fact presented to
us, (that is, when they are directly subjected to our
bodily senses or our mental sensations, as when we say,
<q>The sun shines,</q> or <q>The prospect is charming,</q> or
indirectly by means of a picture or even a narrative,)
then there is no difficulty in determining what is meant
by saying that our enunciation of a proposition concerning
them implies an apprehension of things; because
we can actually point out the objects which they
indicate. But supposing those things are no longer
before us, supposing they have passed beyond our field
of view, or the book is closed in which the description of
them occurs, how can an apprehension of things be said
to remain to us? It remains on our minds by means of
the faculty of memory. Memory consists in a present
imagination of things that are past; memory retains
the impressions and likenesses of what they were when
before us; and when we make use of the proposition
which refers to them, it supplies us with objects by
which to interpret it. They are things still, as being
the reflections of things in a mental mirror.
</p>

<p>
Hence the poet calls memory <q>the mind's eye.</q> I
am in a foreign country among unfamiliar sights; at
will I am able to conjure up before me the vision of my
home, and all that belongs to it, its rooms and their furniture,
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
its books, its inmates, their countenances, looks
and movements. I see those who once were there and
are no more; past scenes, and the very expression of the
features, and the tones of the voices, of those who took
part in them, in a time of trial or difficulty. I create
nothing; I see the facsimiles of facts; and of these facsimiles
the words and propositions which I use concerning
them are from habitual association the proper or the
sole expression.
</p>

<p>
And so again, I may have seen a celebrated painting,
or some great pageant, or some public man; and I have
on my memory stored up and ready at hand, but latent,
an impress more or less distinct of that experience. The
words <q>the Madonna di S. Sisto,</q> or <q>the last Coronation,</q>
or <q>the Duke of Wellington,</q> have power to
revive that impress of it. Memory has to do with individual
things and nothing that is not individual. And
my apprehension of its notices is conveyed in a collection
of singular and real propositions.
</p>

<p>
I have hitherto been adducing instances from (for the
most part) objects of sight; but the memory preserves
the impress, though not so vivid, of the experiences which
come to us through our other senses also. The memory
of a beautiful air, or the scent of a particular flower, as
far as any remembrance remains of it, is the continued
presence in our minds of a likeness of it, which its actual
presence has left there. I can bring before me the music
of the <hi rend='italic'>Adeste Fideles</hi>, as if I were actually hearing it;
and the scent of a clematis as if I were in my garden;
and the flavour of a peach as if it were in season; and
the thought I have of all these is as of something individual
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
and from without,&mdash;as much as the things themselves,
the tune, the scent, and the flavour, are from
without,&mdash;though, compared with the things themselves,
these images (as they may be called) are faint
and intermitting.
</p>

<p>
Nor need such an image be in any sense an abstraction,
though I may have eaten a hundred peaches in
times past, the impression, which remains on my memory
of the flavour, may be of any of them, of the ten, twenty,
thirty units, as the case may be, not a general notion,
distinct from every one of them, and formed from all of
them by a fabrication of my mind.
</p>

<p>
And so again the apprehension which we have of our
past mental acts of any kind, of hope, inquiry, effort,
triumph, disappointment, suspicion, hatred, and a hundred
others, is an apprehension of the memory of those
definite acts, and therefore an apprehension of things;
not to say that many of them do not need memory, but
are such as admit of being actually summoned and repeated
at our will. Such an apprehension again is
elicited by propositions embodying the notices of our
history, of our pursuits and their results, of our friends,
of our bereavements, of our illnesses, of our fortunes,
which remain imprinted upon our memory as sharply
and deeply as is any recollection of sight. Nay, and
such recollections may have in them an individuality and
completeness which outlives the impressions made by
sensible objects. The memory of countenances and of
places in times past may fade away from the mind; but
the vivid image of certain anxieties or deliverances never.
</p>

<p>
And by means of these particular and personal experiences,
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
thus impressed upon us, we attain an apprehension
of what such things are at other times when we
have not experience of them; an apprehension of sights
and sounds, of colours and forms, of places and persons,
of mental acts and states, parallel to our actual experiences,
such, that, when we meet with definite propositions
expressive of them, our apprehension cannot be
called abstract and notional. If I am told <q>there is a
raging fire in London,</q> or <q>London is on fire,</q> <q>fire</q>
need not be a common noun in my apprehension more
than <q>London.</q> The word may recall to my memory
the experience of a fire which I have known elsewhere,
or of some vivid description which I have read. It is of
course difficult to draw the line and to say where the
office of memory ends, and where abstraction takes its
place; and again, as I said in my first pages, the same
proposition is to one man an image, to another a notion;
but still there is a host of predicates, of the most various
kinds, <q>lovely,</q> <q>vulgar,</q> <q>a conceited man,</q> <q>a
manufacturing town,</q> <q>a catastrophe,</q> and any number
of others, which, though as predicates they would
be accounted common nouns, are in fact in the mouths
of particular persons singular, as conveying images of
things individual, as the rustic in Virgil says,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Urbem, quam dicunt Romam, Melibœe, putavi,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Stultus ego, huic nostræ similem.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And so the child's idea of a king, as derived from his
picture-book, will be that of a fierce or stern or venerable
man, seated above a flight of steps, with a crown on
his head and a sceptre in his hand. In these two instances
indeed the experience does but mislead, when
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
applied to the unknown; but it often happens on the
contrary, that it is a serviceable help, especially when a
man has large experiences and has learned to distinguish
between them and apply them duly, as in the instance of
the hero <q>who knew many cities of men and many minds.</q>
</p>

<p>
Further, we are able by an inventive faculty, or, as I
may call it, the faculty of composition, to follow the
descriptions of things which have never come before us,
and to form, out of such passive impressions as experience
has heretofore left on our minds, new images,
which, though mental creations, are in no sense abstractions,
and though ideal, are not notional. They are concrete
units in the minds both of the party describing and
the party informed of them. Thus I may never have
seen a palm or a banana, but I have conversed with those
who have, or I have read graphic accounts of it, and,
from my own previous knowledge of other trees, have
been able with so ready an intelligence to interpret their
language, and to light up such an image of it in my
thoughts, that, were it not that I never was in the
countries where the tree is found, I should fancy that I
had actually seen it. Hence again it is the very praise
we give to the characters of some great poet or historian
that he is so individual. I am able as it were to
gaze on Tiberius, as Tacitus draws him, and to figure to
myself our James the First, as he is painted in Scott's
Romance. The assassination of Cæsar, his <q>Et tu,
Brute?</q> his collecting his robes about him, and his fall
under Pompey's statue, all this becomes a fact to me
and an object of real apprehension. Thus it is that we
live in the past and in the distant; by means of our
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
capacity of interpreting the statements of others about
former ages or foreign climes by the lights of our own
experience. The picture, which historians are able to
bring before us, of Cæsar's death, derives its vividness
and effect from its virtual appeal to the various images
of our memory.
</p>

<p>
This faculty of composition is of course a step beyond
experience, but we have now reached its furthest point;
it is mainly limited as regards its materials, by the sense
of sight. As regards the other senses, new images cannot
well be elicited and shaped out of old experiences. No
description, however complete, could convey to my mind
an exact likeness of a tune or an harmony, which I have
never heard; and still less of a scent, which I have never
smelt. Generic resemblances and metaphorical substitutes
are indeed producible; but I should not acquire
any real knowledge of the Scotch air <q>There's nae luck</q>
by being told it was like <q>Auld lang syne,</q> or <q>Robin
Gray;</q> and if I said that Mozart's melodies were as a
summer sky or as the breath of Zephyr, I should be
better understood by those who knew Mozart than by
those who did not. Such vague illustrations suggest
intellectual notions, not images.
</p>

<p>
And quite as difficult is it to create or to apprehend by
description images of mental facts, of which we have no
direct experience. I may indeed, as I have already said,
bring home to my mind so complex a fact as an historical
character, by composition out of my experiences
about character generally; Tiberius, James the First,
Louis the Eleventh, or Napoleon; but who is able to
infuse into me, or how shall I imbibe, a sense of the
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
peculiarities of the style of Cicero or Virgil, if I have not
read their writings? or how shall I gain a shadow of a
perception of the wit or the grace ascribed to the conversation
of the French salons, being myself an untravelled
John Bull? And so again, as regards the affections and
passions of our nature, they are <hi rend='italic'>sui generis</hi> respectively,
and incommensurable, and must be severally experienced
in order to be apprehended really. I can understand the
<foreign rend='italic'>rabbia</foreign> of a native of Southern Europe, if I am of a
passionate temper myself; and the taste for speculation
or betting found in great traders or on the turf, if I am
fond of enterprise or games of chance; but on the other
hand, not all the possible descriptions of headlong love
will make me comprehend the <emph>delirium</emph>, if I have never
had a fit of it; nor will ever so many sermons about the
inward satisfaction of strict conscientiousness create in
my mind the image of a virtuous action and its attendant
sentiments, if I have been brought up to lie, thieve and
indulge my appetites. Thus we meet with men of the
world who cannot enter into the very idea of devotion,
and think, for instance, that, from the nature of the case,
a life of religious seclusion must be either one of unutterable
dreariness or abandoned sensuality, because they
know of no exercise of the affections but what is merely
human; and with others again, who, living in the home
of their own selfishness, ridicule as something fanatical
and pitiable the self-sacrifices of generous high-mindedness
and chivalrous honour. They cannot create images
of these things, any more than children can on the
contrary of vice, when they ask whereabouts and who the
bad men are; for they have no personal memories, and
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
have to content themselves with notions drawn from books
or from what others tell them.
</p>

<p>
So much on the apprehension of things and on the
real sense in our use of language; now let us pass on to
the notional sense.
</p>

<p>
2. Experience tells us only of individual things, and
these things are innumerable. Our minds might have
been so constructed as to be able to receive and retain an
exact image of each of these various objects, one by one,
as it came before us, but only in and for itself, without
the power of comparing it with any of the others. But
this is not our case: on the contrary, to compare and to
contrast are among the most prominent and busy of our
intellectual functions. Instinctively, even though unconsciously,
we are ever instituting comparisons between
the manifold phenomena of the external world, as we
meet with them, criticizing, referring to a standard, collecting,
analyzing them. Nay, as if by one and the
same action, as soon as we perceive them, we also perceive
that they are like each other or unlike, or rather
both like and unlike at once. We apprehend spontaneously,
even before we set about apprehending, that man
is like man, yet unlike; and unlike a horse, a tree, a
mountain, or a monument, yet in some, though not the
same respects, like each of them. And in consequence,
as I have said, we are ever grouping and discriminating,
measuring and sounding, framing cross classes and cross
divisions, and thereby rising from particulars to generals,
that is from images to notions.
</p>

<p>
In processes of this kind we regard things, not as they
are in themselves, but mainly as they stand in relation
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
to each other. We look at nothing simply for its own
sake; we cannot look at any one thing without keeping
our eyes on a multitude of other things besides. <q>Man</q>
is no longer what he really is, an individual presented to
us by our senses, but as we read him in the light of those
comparisons and contrasts which we have made him
suggest to us. He is attenuated into an aspect, or relegated
to his place in a classification. Thus his appellation
is made to suggest, not the real being which
he is in this or that specimen of himself, but a definition.
If I might use a harsh metaphor, I should
say he is made the logarithm of his true self, and in
that shape is worked with the ease and satisfaction of
logarithms.
</p>

<p>
It is plain what a different sense language will bear
in this system of intellectual notions from what it has
when it is the representative of things: and such a use
of it is not only the very foundation of all science, but
may be, and is, carried out in literature and in the ordinary
intercourse of man with man. And then it comes
to pass that individual propositions about the concrete
almost cease to be, and are diluted or starved into abstract
notions. The events of history and the characters who
figure in it lose their individuality. States and governments,
society and its component parts, cities, nations,
even the physical face of the country, things past, and
things contemporary, all that fulness of meaning which I
have described as accruing to language from experience,
now that experience is absent, necessarily becomes to the
multitude of men nothing but a heap of notions, little
more intelligible than the beauties of a prospect to the
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
short-sighted, or the music of a great master to a
listener who has no ear.
</p>

<p>
I suppose most men will recollect in their past years
how many mistakes they have made about persons, parties,
local occurrences, nations and the like, of which at
the time they had no actual knowledge of their own:
how ashamed or how amused they have since been at
their own gratuitous idealism when they came into possession
of the real facts concerning them. They were
accustomed to treat the definite Titus or Sempronius as
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quidam homo</foreign>, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>individuum vagum</foreign> of the logician.
They spoke of his opinions, his motives, his practices, as
their traditional rule for the <emph>species</emph> Titus or Sempronius
enjoined. In order to find out what individual men in
flesh and blood were, they fancied that they had nothing
to do but to refer to commonplaces, alphabetically
arranged. Thus they were well up with the character of
a Whig statesman or Tory magnate, a Wesleyan, a Congregationalist,
a parson, a priest, a philanthropist, a
writer of controversy, a sceptic; and found themselves
prepared, without the trouble of direct inquiry, to draw
the individual after the peculiarities of his type. And so
with national character; the late Duke of Wellington
must have been impulsive, quarrelsome, witty, clever at
repartee, for he was an Irishman; in like manner, we
must have cold and selfish Scots, crafty Italians, vulgar
Americans, and Frenchmen, half tiger, half monkey. As
to the French, those who are old enough to recollect the
wars with Napoleon, know what eccentric notions were
popularly entertained about them in England; how it
was even a surprise to find some military man, who was
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
a prisoner of war, to be tall and stout, because it was a
received idea that all Frenchmen were undersized and
lived on frogs.
</p>

<p>
Such again are the ideal personages who figure in
romances and dramas of the old school; tyrants, monks,
crusaders, princes in disguise, and captive damsels; or
benevolent or angry fathers, and spendthrift heirs; like
the symbolical characters in some of Shakespeare's plays,
<q>a Tapster,</q> or <q>a Lord Mayor,</q> or in the stage directions
<q>Enter two murderers.</q>
</p>

<p>
What I have been illustrating in the case of persons,
might be instanced in regard to places, transactions,
physical calamities, events in history. Words which are
used by an eye-witness to express things, unless he be
especially eloquent or graphic, may only convey general
notions. Such is, and ever must be, the popular and
ordinary mode of apprehending language. On few subjects
only have any of us the opportunity of realizing in
our minds what we speak and hear about; and we fancy
that we are doing justice to individual men and things
by making them a mere <emph>synthesis</emph> of qualities, as if any
number whatever of abstractions would, by being fused
together, be equivalent to one concrete.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Here then we have two modes of thought, both using
the same words, both having one origin, yet with nothing
in common in their results. The informations of sense
and sensation are the initial basis of both of them; but
in the one we take hold of objects from within them, and
in the other we view them from without them; we perpetuate
them as images in the one case, we transform
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
them into notions in the other. And natural to us as
are both processes in their first elements and in their
growth, however divergent and independent in their
direction, they cannot really be inconsistent with each
other; yet no one from the sight of a horse or a dog
would be able to anticipate its zoological definition, nor
from a knowledge of its definition to draw such a picture
as would direct another to the living specimen.
</p>

<p>
Each use of propositions has its own excellence and
serviceableness, and each has its own imperfection. To
apprehend notionally is to have breadth of mind, but to
be shallow; to apprehend really is to be deep, but to be
narrow-minded. The latter is the conservative principle
of knowledge, and the former the principle of its advancement.
Without the apprehension of notions, we should
for ever pace round one small circle of knowledge; without
a firm hold upon things, we shall waste ourselves in
vague speculations. However, real apprehension has the
precedence, as being the scope and end and the test of
notional; and the fuller is the mind's hold upon things
or what it considers such, the more fertile is it in its
aspects of them, and the more practical in its definitions.
</p>

<p>
Of course, as these two are not inconsistent with each
other, they may co-exist in the same mind. Indeed
there is no one who does not to a certain extent exercise
both the one and the other. Viewed in relation to Assent,
which has led to my speaking of them, they do not in
any way affect the nature of the mental act, which is in
all cases absolute and unconditional; but they give it an
external character corresponding respectively to their own:
so much so, that at first sight it might seem as if Assent
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
admitted of degrees, on account of the variation of vividness
in these different apprehensions. As notions come
of abstractions, so images come of experiences; the more
fully the mind is occupied by an experience, the keener
will be its assent to it, if it assents, and on the other
hand, the duller will be its assent and the less operative,
the more it is engaged with an abstraction; and thus a
scale of assents is conceivable, either in the instance of
one mind upon different subjects, or of many minds upon
one subject, varying from an assent which looks like
mere inference up to a belief both intense and practical,&mdash;from
the acceptance which we accord to some accidental
news of the day to the supernatural dogmatic faith of the
Christian.
</p>

<p>
It follows to treat of Assent under this double aspect
of its subject-matter,&mdash;assent to notions, and assent to
things.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Notional And Real Assent.</head>

<p>
1. I have said that our apprehension of a proposition
varies in strength, and that it is stronger when it is concerned
with a proposition expressive to us of things than
when concerned with a proposition expressive of notions;
and I have given this reason for it, viz. that what is
concrete exerts a force and makes an impression on the
mind which nothing abstract can rival. That is, I have
argued that, because the object is more powerful, therefore
so is the apprehension of it.
</p>

<p>
I do not think it unfair reasoning thus to take the
apprehension for its object. The mind is ever stimulated
in proportion to the cause stimulating it. Sights, for
instance, sway us, as scents do not; whether this be
owing to a greater power in the thing seen, or to a
greater receptivity and expansiveness in the sense of
seeing, is a superfluous question. The strong object
would make the apprehension strong. Our sense of
seeing is able to open to its object, as our sense of smell
cannot open to its own. Its objects are able to awaken
the mind, take possession of it, inspire it, act through it,
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
with an energy and variousness which is not found in
the case of scents and their apprehension. Since we
cannot draw the line between the object and the act, I
am at liberty to say, as I have said, that, as is the thing
apprehended, so is the apprehension.
</p>

<p>
And so in like manner as regards apprehension of
mental objects. If an image derived from experience or
information is stronger than an abstraction, conception,
or conclusion&mdash;if I am more arrested by our Lord's
bearing before Pilate and Herod than by the <q>Justum et
tenacem</q> &amp;c. of the poet, more arrested by His Voice
saying to us, <q>Give to him that asketh thee,</q> than by
the best arguments of the Economist against indiscriminate
almsgiving, it does not matter for my present purpose
whether the objects give strength to the apprehension
or the apprehension gives large admittance into the mind
to the object. It is in human nature to be more affected
by the concrete than by the abstract; it may be the
reverse with other beings. The apprehension, then, may
be as fairly said to possess the force which acts upon us,
as the object apprehended.
</p>

<p>
2. Real apprehension, then, may be pronounced stronger
than notional, because things, which are its objects, are
confessedly more impressive and affective than notions,
which are the objects of notional. Experiences and their
images strike and occupy the mind, as abstractions and
their combinations do not. Next, passing on to Assent,
I observe that it is this variation in the mind's apprehension
of an object to which it assents, and not any incompleteness
in the assent itself, which leads us to speak of
strong and weak assents, as if Assent itself admitted of
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
degrees. In either mode of apprehension, be it real or
be it notional, the assent preserves its essential characteristic
of being unconditional. The assent of a Stoic to
the <q>Justum et tenacem</q> &amp;c. may be as genuine an
assent, as absolute and entire, as little admitting of
degree or variation, as distinct from an act of inference,
as the assent of a Christian to the history of our Lord's
Passion in the Gospel.
</p>

<p>
3. However, characteristic as it is of Assent, to be thus
in its nature simply one and indivisible, and thereby
essentially different from Inference, which is ever varying
in strength, never quite at the same pitch in any two of
its acts, still it is at the same time true that it may be
difficult in fact, by external tokens, to distinguish certain
acts of assent from certain acts of inference. Thus, whereas
no one could possibly confuse the real assent of a Christian
to the fact of our Lord's crucifixion, with the notional
acceptance of it, as a point of history, on the part of a
philosophical heathen (so removed from each other, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>toto
cœlo</foreign>, are the respective modes of apprehending it in the
two cases, though in both the assent is in its nature one
and the same), nevertheless it would be easy to mistake
the Stoic's notional assent, genuine though it might be,
to the moral nobleness of the just man <q>struggling in
the storms of fate,</q> for a mere act of inference resulting
from the principles of his Stoical profession, or
again for an assent merely to the inferential necessity
of the nobleness of that struggle. Nothing, indeed,
is more common than to praise men for their consistency
to their principles, whatever those principles
are, that is, to praise them on an inference,
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
without thereby implying any assent to the principles
themselves.
</p>

<p>
The cause of this resemblance between acts so distinct
is obvious. It exists only in cases of notional assents;
when the assent is given to notions, then it is possible
to hesitate in deciding whether it is assent or inference,
whether the mind is merely without doubt or whether it
is actually certain. And the reason is this: notional
Assent seems like Inference, because the apprehension
which accompanies acts of inference is notional also,&mdash;because
Inference is engaged for the most part on notional
propositions, both premiss and conclusion. This point,
which I have implied throughout, I here distinctly record,
and shall enlarge upon hereafter. Only propositions
about individuals are not notional, and they are seldom
the matter of inference. Thus, did the Stoic infer the
fact of our Lord's death instead of assenting to it, the
proposition would have been as much an abstraction
to him as the <q>Justum et tenacem,</q> &amp;c; nay further,
the <q>Justus et tenax</q> was at least a notion in his
mind, but <q>Jesus Christ</q> would, in the schools of
Athens or of Rome, have stood for less, for an unknown
being, the x or y of a formula. Except then
in some of the cases of singular conclusions, inferences
are employed on notions, that is, unless they are
employed on mere symbols; and, indeed, when they
are symbolical, then are they clearest and most
cogent, as I shall hereafter show. The next clearest
are such as carry out the necessary results of previous
classifications, and therefore may be called definitions
or conclusions, as we please. For instance,
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
having divided beings into their classes, the definition
of man is inevitable.
</p>

<p>
4. We may call it then the normal state of Inference
to apprehend propositions as notions:&mdash;and we may call
it the normal state of Assent to apprehend propositions
as things. If notional apprehension is most congenial
to Inference, real apprehension will be the most natural
concomitant on Assent. An act of Inference includes
in its object the dependence of its thesis upon its premisses,
that is, upon a relation, which is abstract; but
an act of Assent rests wholly on the thesis as its object,
and the reality of the thesis is almost a condition of its
unconditionality.
</p>

<p>
5. I am led on to make one remark more, and it shall
be my last.
</p>

<p>
An act of assent, it seems, is the most perfect and
highest of its kind, when it is exercised on propositions,
which are apprehended as experiences and images, that
is, which stand for things; and, on the other hand, an
act of inference is the most perfect and highest of its
kind, when it is exercised on propositions which are
apprehended as notions, that is, which are creations of
the mind. An act of inference indeed may be made with
either of these modes of apprehension; so may an act of
assent; but, when inferences are exercised on things,
they tend to be conjectures or presentiments, without
logical force; and when assents are exercised on notions,
they tend to be mere assertions without any personal
hold on them on the part of those who make them. If
this be so, the paradox is true, that, when Inference is
clearest, Assent may be least forcible, and, when Assent
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
is most intense, Inference may be least distinct;&mdash;for,
though acts of assent require previous acts of inference,
they require them, not as adequate causes, but as <hi rend='italic'>sine
quâ non</hi> conditions: and, while the apprehension
strengthens Assent, Inference often weakens the apprehension.
</p>

<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 1. Notional Assents.</head>

<p>
I shall consider Assent made to propositions which
express abstractions or notions under five heads; which
I shall call Profession, Credence, Opinion, Presumption,
and Speculation.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Profession.</hi>
</p>

<p>
There are assents so feeble and superficial, as to be
little more than assertions. I class them all together
under the head of Profession. Such are the assents
made upon habit and without reflection; as when a man
calls himself a Tory or a Liberal, as having been brought
up as such; or again, when he adopts as a matter of
course the literary or other fashions of the day, admiring
the poems, or the novels, or the music, or the personages,
or the costume, or the wines, or the manners, which
happen to be popular, or are patronized in the higher
circles. Such again are the assents of men of wavering
restless minds, who take up and then abandon beliefs so
readily, so suddenly, as to make it appear that they had
no view (as it is called) on the matter they professed,
and did not know to what they assented or why.
</p>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
Then, again, when men say they have no doubt of a
thing, this is a case, in which it is difficult to determine
whether they assent to it, infer it, or consider it highly
probable. There are many cases, indeed, in which it is
impossible to discriminate between assent, inference, and
assertion, on account of the otiose, passive, inchoate
character of the act in question. If I say that to-morrow
will be fine, what does this enunciation mean? Perhaps
it means that it ought to be fine, if the glass tells truly;
then it is the inference of a probability. Perhaps it
means no more than a surmise, because it is fine to-day,
or has been so for the week past. And perhaps it is a
compliance with the word of another, in which case it is
sometimes a real assent, sometimes a polite assertion or
a wish.
</p>

<p>
Many a disciple of a philosophical school, who talks
fluently, does but assert, when he seems to assent to the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dicta</foreign>
of his master, little as he may be aware of it. Nor
is he secured against this self-deception by knowing the
arguments on which those <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dicta</foreign>
rest, for he may learn
the arguments by heart, as a careless schoolboy gets up
his Euclid. This practice of asserting simply on authority,
with the pretence and without the reality of assent,
is what is meant by formalism. To say <q>I do not understand
a proposition, but I accept it on authority,</q> is
not formalism, but faith; it is not a direct assent to the
proposition, still it <emph>is</emph> an assent to the authority which
enunciates it; but what I here speak of is professing to
understand without understanding. It is thus that
political and religious watchwords are created; first one
man of name and then another adopts them, till their
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
use becomes popular, and then every one professes them,
because every one else does. Such words are <q>liberality,</q>
<q>progress,</q> <q>light,</q> <q>civilization;</q> such are
<q>justification by faith only,</q> <q>vital religion,</q> <q>private
judgment,</q> <q>the Bible and nothing but the Bible.</q>
Such again are <q>Rationalism,</q> <q>Gallicanism,</q> <q>Jesuitism,</q>
<q>Ultramontanism</q>&mdash;all of which, in the mouths
of conscientious thinkers, have a definite meaning, but
are used by the multitude as war-cries, nicknames, and
shibboleths, with scarcely enough of the scantiest grammatical
apprehension of them to allow of their being
considered really more than assertions.
</p>

<p>
Thus, instances occur now and then, when, in consequence
of the urgency of some fashionable superstition
or popular delusion, some eminent scientific authority is
provoked to come forward, and to set the world right by
his <q>ipse dixit.</q> He, indeed, himself knows very well
what he is about; he has a right to speak, and his
reasonings and conclusions are sufficient, not only for his
own, but for general assent, and, it may be, are as
simply true and impregnable, as they are authoritative;
but an intelligent hold on the matter in dispute, such as
he has himself, cannot be expected in the case of men
in general. They, nevertheless, one and all, repeat and
retail his arguments, as suddenly as if they had not to
study them, as heartily as if they understood them,
changing round and becoming as strong antagonists of
the error which their master has exposed, as if they had
never been its advocates. If their word is to be taken,
it is not simply his authority that moves them, which
would be sensible enough and suitable in them, both
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
apprehension and assent being in that case grounded on
the maxim <q>Cuique in arte suâ credendum,</q> but so far
forth as they disown this motive, and claim to judge in
a scientific question of the worth of arguments which
require some real knowledge, they are little better, not
of course in a very serious matter, than pretenders and
formalists.
</p>

<p>
Not only Authority, but Inference also may impose on
us assents which in themselves are little better than assertions,
and which, so far as they are assents, can only be
notional assents, as being assents, not to the propositions
inferred, but to the truth of those propositions.
For instance, it can be proved by irrefragable calculations,
that the stars are not less than billions of miles
distant from the earth; and the process of calculation,
upon which such statements are made, is not so difficult
as to require authority to secure our acceptance of both
it and of them; yet who can say that he has any real,
nay, any notional apprehension of a billion or a trillion?
We can, indeed, have some notion of it, if we analyze it
into its factors, if we compare it with other numbers, or
if we illustrate it by analogies or by its implications;
but I am speaking of the vast number in itself. We
cannot assent to a proposition of which it is the predicate;
we can but assent to the truth of it.
</p>

<p>
This leads me to the question, whether belief in a
mystery can be more than an assertion. I consider it
can be an assent, and my reasons for saying so are as
follows:&mdash;A mystery is a proposition conveying incompatible
notions, or is a statement of the inconceivable.
Now we can assent to propositions (and a mystery is a
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
proposition), provided we can apprehend them; therefore
we can assent to a mystery, for, unless we in some sense
apprehended it, we should not recognize it to be a mystery,
that is, a statement uniting incompatible notions.
The same act, then, which enables us to discern that the
words of the proposition express a mystery, capacitates
us for assenting to it. Words which make nonsense, do
not make a mystery. No one would call Warton's line&mdash;<q>Revolving
swans proclaim the welkin near</q>&mdash;an
inconceivable assertion. It is equally plain, that the
assent which we give to mysteries, as such, is notional
assent; for, by the supposition, it is assent to propositions
which we cannot conceive, whereas, if we had had
experience of them, we should be able to conceive them,
and without experience assent is not real.
</p>

<p>
But the question follows, Can processes of inference
end in a mystery? that is, not only in what is incomprehensible,
that the stars are billions of miles from each
other, but in what is inconceivable, in the co-existence
of (seeming) incompatibilities? For how, it may be
asked, can reason carry out notions into their contradictories?
since all the developments of a truth must
from the nature of the case be consistent both with it
and with each other. I answer, certainly processes of
inference, however accurate, can end in mystery; and I
solve the objection to such a doctrine thus:&mdash;our notion
of a thing may be only partially faithful to the original;
it may be in excess of the thing, or it may represent it
incompletely, and, in consequence, it may serve for it,
it may stand for it, only to a certain point, in certain
cases, but no further. After that point is reached, the
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
notion and the thing part company; and then the
notion, if still used as the representative of the thing,
will work out conclusions, not inconsistent with itself,
but with the thing to which it no longer corresponds.
</p>

<p>
This is seen most familiarly in the use of metaphors.
Thus, in an Oxford satire, which deservedly made a
sensation in its day, it is said that Vice <q>from its hardness
takes a polish too.</q><note place='foot'><q>The Oxford Spy,</q>
1818; by J. S. Boone, p. 107.</note> Whence we might argue,
that, whereas Caliban was vicious, he was therefore
polished; but politeness and Caliban are incompatible
notions. Or again, when some one said, perhaps to Dr.
Johnson, that a certain writer (say Hume) was a clear
thinker, he made answer, <q>All shallows are clear.</q>
But supposing Hume to be in fact both a clear and a
deep thinker, yet supposing clearness and depth are incompatible
in their literal sense, which the objection seems
to imply, and still in their full literal sense were to be
ascribed to Hume, then our reasoning about his intellect
has ended in the mystery, <q>Deep Hume is shallow;</q>
whereas the contradiction lies, not in the reasoning, but
in the fancying that inadequate notions can be taken
as the exact representations of things.
</p>

<p>
Hence in science we sometimes use a definition or a
<emph>formula</emph>, not as exact, but as being sufficient for our
purpose, for working out certain conclusions, for a
practical approximation, the error being small, till a
certain point is reached. This is what in theological
investigations I should call an economy.
</p>

<p>
A like contrast between notions and the things which
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
they represent is the principle of suspense and curiosity
in those enigmatical sayings which were frequent in the
early stage of human society. In them the problem
proposed to the acuteness of the hearers, is to find some
real thing which may unite in itself certain conflicting
notions which in the question are attributed to it: <q>Out
of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came
forth sweetness;</q> or, <q>What creature is that, which in
the morning goes on four legs, at noon on two, and on
three in the evening?</q> The answer, which names the
thing, interprets and thereby limits the notions under
which it has been represented.
</p>

<p>
Let us take an example in algebra. Its calculus is
commonly used to investigate, not only the relations
of quantity generally, but geometrical facts in particular.
Now it is at once too wide and too narrow
for such a purpose, fitting on to the doctrine of lines
and angles with a bad fit, as the coat of a short and
stout man might serve the needs of one who was tall
and slim. Certainly it works well for geometrical purposes
up to a certain point, as when it enables us to dispense
with the cumbrous method of proof in questions
of ratio and proportion, which is adopted in the fifth
book of Euclid; but what are we to make of the fourth
power of <emph>a</emph>, when it is to be translated into geometrical
language? If from this algebraical expression we determined
that space admitted of four dimensions, we should
be enunciating a mystery, because we should be applying
to space a notion which belongs to quantity. In this
case algebra is in excess of geometrical truth. Now let
us take an instance in which it falls short of geometry,&mdash;What
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
is the meaning of the square root of <emph>minus a</emph>?
Here the mystery is on the side of algebra; and, in
accordance with the principle which I am illustrating,
it has sometimes been considered as an abortive effort
to express, what is really beyond the capacity of algebraical
notation, the direction and position of lines in
the third dimension of space, as well as their length
upon a plane. When the calculus is urged on by the
inevitable course of the working to do what it cannot do,
it stops short as if in resistance, and protests by an
absurdity.
</p>

<p>
Our notions of things are never simply commensurate
with the things themselves; they are aspects of them,
more or less exact, and sometimes a
mistake <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ab initio</foreign>.
Take an instance from arithmetic:&mdash;We are accustomed
to subject all that exists to numeration; but, to be
correct, we are bound first to reduce to some level of
possible comparison the things which we wish to number.
We must be able to say, not only that they are ten,
twenty, or a hundred, but so many definite somethings.
For instance, we could not without extravagance throw
together Napoleon's brain, ambition, hand, soul, smile,
height, and age at Marengo, and say that there were
seven of them, though there are seven words; nor will
it even be enough to content ourselves with what may
be called a negative level, viz. that these seven were an
un-English or are a departed seven. Unless numeration is
to issue in nonsense, it must be conducted on conditions.
This being the case, there are, for what we know, collections
of beings, to whom the notion of number
cannot be attached, except <emph>catachrestically</emph>, because,
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
taken individually, no positive point of real agreement
can be found between them, by which to call
them. If indeed we can denote them by a plural noun,
then we can measure that plurality; but if they agree
in nothing, they cannot agree in bearing a common
name, and to say that they amount to a thousand these
or those, is not to number them, but to count up a
certain number of names or words which we have
written down.
</p>

<p>
Thus, the Angels have been considered by divines to
have each of them a species to himself; and we may
fancy each of them so absolutely
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sui similis</foreign> as to be
like nothing else, so that it would be as untrue to
speak of a thousand Angels as of a thousand Hannibals
or Ciceros. It will be said, indeed, that all beings but
One at least will come under the notion of creatures,
and are dependent upon that One; but that is true of
the brain, smile, and height of Napoleon, which no one
would call three creatures. But, if all this be so, much
more does it apply to our speculations concerning the
Supreme Being, whom it may be unmeaning, not only
to number with other beings, but to subject to number
in regard to His own intrinsic characteristics. That
is, to apply arithmetical notions to Him may be as unphilosophical
as it is profane. Though He is at once
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the word <q>Trinity</q>
belongs to those notions of Him which are forced on
us by the necessity of our finite conceptions, the real
and immutable distinction which exists between Person
and Person implying in itself no infringement of His
real and numerical Unity. And if it be asked how,
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
if we cannot properly speak of Him as Three, we can
speak of Him as One, I reply that He is not One in
the way in which created things are severally units;
for one, as applied to ourselves, is used in contrast to
two or three and a whole series of numbers; but of the
Supreme Being it is safer to use the word <q>monad</q>
than unit, for He has not even such relation to His
creatures as to allow, philosophically speaking, of our
contrasting Him with them.
</p>

<p>
Coming back to the main subject, which I have illustrated
at the risk of digression, I observe, that an alleged
fact is not therefore impossible because it is inconceivable;
for the incompatible notions, in which consists
its inconceivableness, need not each of them really belong
to it in that fulness which involves their being
incompatible with each other. It is true indeed that I
deny the possibility of two straight lines enclosing a
space, on the ground of its being inconceivable; but I
do so because a straight line is a notion and nothing
more, and not a thing, to which I may have attached a
notion more or less unfaithful. I have defined a straight
line in my own way at my own pleasure; the question
is not one of facts at all, but of the consistency with
each other of definitions and of their logical consequences.
</p>

<p>
<q>Space is not infinite, for nothing but the Creator is
such:</q>&mdash;starting from this thesis as a theological information,
to be assumed as a fact, though not one of experience,
we arrive at once at an insoluble mystery; for,
if space be not infinite, it is finite, and finite space is a
contradiction in notions, space, as such, implying the
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
absence of boundaries. Here again it is our notion that
carries us beyond the fact, and in opposition to it, showing
that from the first what we apprehend of space does
not in all respects correspond to the thing, of which
indeed we have no image.
</p>

<p>
This, then, is another instance in which the juxtaposition
of notions by the logical faculty lands us in
what are commonly called mysteries. Notions are but
aspects of things; the free deductions from one of these
necessarily contradicts the free deductions from another.
After proceeding in our investigations a certain way,
suddenly a blank or a maze presents itself before the
mental vision, as when the eye is confused by the
varying slides of a telescope. Thus, we believe in the
infinitude of the Divine Attributes, but we can have no
experience of infinitude as a fact; the word stands for a
definition or a notion. Hence, when we try how to
reconcile in the moral world the fulness of mercy with
exactitude in sanctity and justice, or to explain that
the physical tokens of creative skill need not suggest
any want of creative power, we feel we are not masters
of our subject. We apprehend sufficiently to be able to
assent to these theological truths as mysteries; did we
not apprehend them at all, we should be merely asserting;
though even then we might convert that assertion
into an assent, if we wished to do so, as I have already
shown, by making it the subject of a proposition, and
predicating of it that it is true.
</p>

<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Credence.</hi>
</p>

<p>
What I mean by giving credence to propositions is
pretty much the same as having <q>no doubt</q> about
them. It is the sort of assent which we give to those
opinions and professed facts which are ever presenting
themselves to us without any effort of ours, and which
we commonly take for granted, thereby obtaining a
broad foundation of thought for ourselves, and a medium
of intercourse between ourselves and others. This form
of notional assent comprises a great variety of subject-matters;
and is, as I have implied, of an otiose and passive
character, accepting whatever comes to hand, from whatever
quarter, warranted or not, so that it convey nothing
on the face of it to its own disadvantage. From the
time that we begin to observe, think, and reason, to
the final failure of our powers, we are ever acquiring
fresh and fresh informations by means of our senses,
and still more from others and from books. The friends
or strangers whom we fall in with in the course of the
day, the conversations or discussions to which we are
parties, the newspapers, the light reading of the season,
our recreations, our rambles in the country, our foreign
tours, all pour their contributions of intellectual matter
into the storehouses of our memory; and, though much
may be lost, much is retained. These informations,
thus received with a spontaneous assent, constitute the
furniture of the mind, and make the difference between
its civilized condition and a state of nature. They are
its education, as far as general knowledge can so be
called; and, though education is discipline as well as
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
learning, still, unless the mind implicitly welcomes the
truths, real or ostensible, which these informations
supply, it will gain neither formation nor a stimulus
for its activity and progress. Besides, to believe frankly
what it is told, is in the young an exercise of teachableness
and humility.
</p>

<p>
Credence is the means by which, in high and low, in
the man of the world and in the recluse, our bare and
barren nature is overrun and diversified from without
with a rich and living clothing. It is by such ungrudging,
prompt assents to what is offered to us so
lavishly, that we become possessed of the principles,
doctrines, sentiments, facts, which constitute useful, and
especially liberal knowledge. These various teachings,
shallow though they be, are of a breadth which secures
us against those <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lacunæ</foreign>
of knowledge which are apt to
befall the professed student, and keep us up to the mark
in literature, in the arts, in history, and in public matters.
They give us in great measure our morality, our
politics, our social code, our art of life. They supply
the elements of public opinion, the watchwords of patriotism,
the standards of thought and action; they are
our mutual understandings, our channels of sympathy,
our means of co-operation, and the bond of our civil
union. They become our moral language; we learn
them as we learn our mother tongue; they distinguish
us from foreigners; they are, in each of us, not indeed
personal, but national characteristics.
</p>

<p>
This account of them implies that they are received
with a notional, not a real assent; they are too manifold
to be received in any other way. Even the most practised
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
and earnest minds must needs be superficial in the
greater part of their attainments. They know just
enough on all subjects, in literature, history, politics,
philosophy, and art, to be able to converse sensibly on
them, and to understand those who are really deep in
one or other of them. This is what is called, with a
special appositeness, a gentleman's knowledge, as contrasted
with that of a professional man, and is neither
worthless nor despicable, if used for its proper ends; but
it is never more than the furniture of the mind, as I
have called it; it never is thoroughly assimilated with
it. Yet of course there is nothing to hinder those who
have even the largest stock of such notions from devoting
themselves to one or other of the subjects to which
those notions belong, and mastering it with a real
apprehension; and then their general knowledge of all
subjects may be made variously useful in the direction
of that particular study or pursuit which they have
selected.
</p>

<p>
I have been speaking of secular knowledge; but religion
may be made a subject of notional assent also,
and is especially so made in our own country. Theology,
as such, always is notional, as being scientific: religion,
as being personal, should be real; but, except within a
small range of subjects, it commonly is not real in England.
As to Catholic populations, such as those of medieval
Europe, or the Spain of this day, or quasi-Catholic
as those of Russia, among them assent to religious
objects is real, not notional. To them the Supreme
Being, our Lord, the Blessed Virgin, Angels and Saints,
heaven and hell, are as present as if they were objects of
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
sight; but such a faith does not suit the genius of
modern England. There is in the literary world just
now an affectation of calling religion a <q>sentiment;</q>
and it must be confessed that usually it is nothing more
with our own people, educated or rude. Objects are
barely necessary to it. I do not say so of old Calvinism
or Evangelical Religion; I do not call the religion of
Leighton, Beveridge, Wesley, Thomas Scott, or Cecil
a mere sentiment; nor do I so term the high Anglicanism
of the present generation. But these are only denominations,
parties, schools, compared with the national
religion of England in its length and breadth. <q>Bible
Religion</q> is both the recognized title and the best
description of English religion.
</p>

<p>
It consists, not in rites or creeds, but mainly in
having the Bible read in Church, in the family, and
in private. Now I am far indeed from undervaluing
that mere knowledge of Scripture which is imparted
to the population thus promiscuously. At least in England,
it has to a certain point made up for great and
grievous losses in its Christianity. The reiteration,
again and again, in fixed course in the public service,
of the words of inspired teachers under both Covenants,
and that in grave majestic English, has in matter of
fact been to our people a vast benefit. It has attuned
their minds to religious thoughts; it has given them
a high moral standard; it has served them in associating
religion with compositions which, even humanly
considered, are among the most sublime and beautiful
ever written; especially, it has impressed upon them
the series of Divine Providences in behalf of man from
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
his creation to his end, and, above all, the words,
deeds, and sacred sufferings of Him in whom all the
Providences of God centre.
</p>

<p>
So far the indiscriminate reading of Scripture has
been of service; still, much more is necessary than
the benefits which I have enumerated, to answer to
the idea of a Religion; whereas our national form professes
to be little more than thus reading the Bible and
living a correct life. It is not a religion of persons
and things, of acts of faith and of direct devotion;
but of sacred scenes and pious sentiments. It has been
comparatively careless of creed and catechism; and has
in consequence shown little sense of the need of consistency
in the matter of its teaching. Its doctrines are
not so much facts, as stereotyped aspects of facts; and
it is afraid, so to say, of walking round them. It
induces its followers to be content with this meagre
view of revealed truth; or, rather, it is suspicious and
protests, or is frightened, as if it saw a figure in a
picture move out of its frame, when our Lord, the
Blessed Virgin, or the Holy Apostles, are spoken of as
real beings, and really such as Scripture implies them to
be. I am not denying that the assent which it inculcates
and elicits is genuine as regards its contracted
range of doctrine, but it is at best notional. What
Scripture especially illustrates from its first page to its
last, is God's Providence; and that is nearly the only
doctrine held with a real assent by the mass of religious
Englishmen. Hence the Bible is so great a solace and
refuge to them in trouble. I repeat, I am not speaking
of particular schools and parties in England, whether of
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
the High Church or the Low, but of the mass of piously-minded
and well-living people in all ranks of the community.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Opinion.</hi>
</p>

<p>
That class of assents which I have called Credence,
being a spontaneous acceptance of the various informations,
which are by whatever means conveyed to our
minds, sometimes goes by the name of Opinion. When
we speak of a man's opinions, what do we mean, but the
collection of notions which he happens to have, and does
not easily part with, though he has neither sufficient
proof nor firm grasp of them? This is true; however,
Opinion is a word of various significations, and I prefer
to use it in my own. Besides standing for Credence, it
is sometimes taken to mean Conviction, as when we
speak of the <q>variety of religious opinions,</q> or of being
<q>persecuted for religious opinions,</q> or of our having
<q>no opinion on a particular point,</q> or of another having
<q>no religious opinions.</q> And sometimes it is used in
contrast with Conviction, as synonymous with a light
and casual, though genuine assent; thus, if a man was
every day changing his mind, that is, his assents, we
might say, that he was very changeable in his opinions.
</p>

<p>
I shall here use the word to denote an assent, but an
assent to a proposition, not as true, but as probably true,
that is, to the probability of that which the proposition
enunciates; and, as that probability may vary in strength
without limit, so may the cogency and moment of the
opinion. This account of Opinion may seem to confuse
it with Inference; for the strength of an inference varies
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
with its premisses, and is a probability; but the two acts
of mind are really distinct. Opinion, as being an assent,
is independent of premisses. We have opinions which
we never think of defending by argument, though, of
course, we think they can be so defended. We are even
obstinate in them, or what is called <q>opinionated,</q> and
may say that we have a right to think just as we please,
reason or no reason; whereas Inference is in its nature
and by its profession conditional and uncertain. To say
that <q>we shall have a fine hay-harvest if the present
weather lasts,</q> does not come of the same state of mind
as, <q>I am of opinion that we shall have a fine hay-harvest
this year.</q>
</p>

<p>
Opinion, thus explained, has more connexion with
Credence than with Inference. It differs from Credence
in these two points, viz. that, while Opinion explicitly
assents to the probability of a given proposition, Credence
is an implicit assent to its truth. It differs from Credence
in a third respect, viz. in being a reflex act;&mdash;when we
take a thing for granted, we have credence in it; when
we begin to reflect upon our credence, and to measure,
estimate, and modify it, then we are forming an
opinion.
</p>

<p>
It is in this sense that Catholics speak of theological
opinion, in contrast with faith in dogma. It is much
more than an inferential act, but it is distinct from an
act of certitude. And this is really the sense which
Protestants give to the word, when they interpret it by
Conviction; for their highest opinion in religion is,
generally speaking, an assent to a probability&mdash;as even
Butler has been understood or misunderstood to teach,&mdash;and
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
therefore consistent with toleration of its contradictory.
</p>

<p>
Opinion, being such as I have described, is a notional
assent, for the predicate of the proposition, on which it is
exercised, is the abstract word <q>probable.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Presumption.</hi>
</p>

<p>
By Presumption I mean an assent to first principles;
and by first principles I mean the propositions with
which we start in reasoning on any given subject-matter.
They are in consequence very numerous, and vary in
great measure with the persons who reason, according to
their judgment and power of assent, being received by
some minds, not by others, and only a few of them
received universally. They are all of them notions, not
images, because they express what is abstract, not what
is individual and from direct experience.
</p>

<p>
1. Sometimes our trust in our powers of reasoning
and memory, that is, our implicit assent to their telling
truly, is treated as a first principle; but we cannot
properly be said to have any trust in them as faculties.
At most we trust in particular acts of memory and
reasoning. We are sure there was a yesterday, and that
we did this or that in it; we are sure that three times
six is eighteen, and that the diagonal of a square is
longer than the side. So far as this we may be said to
trust the mental act, by which the object of our assent
is verified; but, in doing so, we imply no recognition of
a general power or faculty, or of any capability or affection
of our minds, over and above the particular act.
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
We know indeed that we have a faculty by which we
remember, as we know we have a faculty by which we
breathe; but we gain this knowledge by abstraction or
inference from its particular acts, not by direct experience.
Nor do we trust in the faculty of memory or
reasoning as such, even after that we have inferred its
existence; for its acts are often inaccurate, nor do we
invariably assent to them.
</p>

<p>
However, if I must speak my mind, I have another
ground for reluctance to speak of our trusting memory
or reasoning, except indeed by a figure of speech. It
seems to me unphilosophical to speak of trusting ourselves.
We are what we are, and we use, not trust our
faculties. To debate about trusting in a case like this, is
parallel to the confusion implied in wishing I had had
a choice if I would be created or no, or speculating
what I should be like, if I were born of other parents.
<q>Proximus sum egomet mihi.</q> Our consciousness of
self is prior to all questions of trust or assent. We act
according to our nature, by means of ourselves, when we
remember or reason. We are as little able to accept or
reject our mental constitution, as our being. We have
not the option; we can but misuse or mar its functions.
We do not confront or bargain with ourselves; and
therefore I cannot call the trustworthiness of the faculties
of memory and reasoning one of our first principles.
</p>

<p>
2. Next, as to the proposition, that things exist
external to ourselves, this I do consider a first principle,
and one of universal reception. It is founded on an instinct;
I so call it, because the brute creation possesses
it. This instinct is directed towards individual phenomena,
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
one by one, and has nothing of the character of a
generalization; and, since it exists in brutes, the gift of
reason is not a condition of its existence, and it may
justly be considered an instinct in man. What the human
mind does is what brutes cannot do, viz. to draw from
our ever-recurring experiences of its testimony in particulars
a general proposition, and, because this instinct or
intuition acts whenever the phenomena of sense present
themselves, to lay down in broad terms, by an inductive
process, the great aphorism, that there is an external
world, and that all the phenomena of sense proceed from
it. This general proposition, to which we go on to
assent, goes (<foreign rend='italic'>extensivè</foreign>,
though not <foreign rend='italic'>intensivè</foreign>) far beyond
our experience, illimitable as that experience may be,
and represents a notion.
</p>

<p>
3. I have spoken, and I think rightly spoken, of instinct
as a force which spontaneously impels us, not only
to bodily movements, but to mental acts. It is instinct
which leads the quasi-intelligent principle (whatever it
is) in brutes to perceive in the phenomena of sense a
something distinct from and beyond those phenomena.
It is instinct which impels the child to recognize in the
smiles or the frowns of a countenance which meets his
eyes, not only a being external to himself, but one whose
looks elicit in him confidence or fear. And, as he instinctively
interprets these physical phenomena, as tokens
of things beyond themselves, so from the sensations attendant
upon certain classes of his thoughts and actions
he gains a perception of an external being, who reads
his mind, to whom he is responsible, who praises and
blames, who promises and threatens. As I am only
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
illustrating a general view by examples, I shall take this
analogy for granted here. As then we have our initial
knowledge of the universe through sense, so do we in
the first instance begin to learn about its Lord and God
from conscience; and, as from particular acts of that
instinct, which makes experiences, mere images (as they
ultimately are) upon the retina, the means of our perceiving
something real beyond them, we go on to draw
the general conclusion that there is a vast external world,
so from the recurring instances in which conscience acts,
forcing upon us importunately the mandate of a Superior,
we have fresh and fresh evidence of the existence of a
Sovereign Ruler, from whom those particular dictates
which we experience proceed; so that, with limitations
which cannot here be made without digressing from my
main subject, we may, by means of that induction from
particular experiences of conscience, have as good a warrant
for concluding the Ubiquitous Presence of One Supreme
Master, as we have, from parallel experience of
sense, for assenting to the fact of a multiform and vast
world, material and mental.
</p>

<p>
However, this assent is notional, because we generalize
a consistent, methodical form of Divine Unity and
Personality with Its attributes, from particular experiences
of the religious instinct, which are themselves,
only <foreign rend='italic'>intensivè</foreign>, not
<foreign rend='italic'>extensivè</foreign>, and in the imagination,
not intellectually, notices of Its Presence; though at the
same time that assent may become real of course, as may
the assent to the external world, viz. when we apply our
general knowledge to a particular instance of that knowledge,
as, according to a former remark, the general
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
<q>varium et mutabile</q> was realized in Dido. And in
thus treating the origin of these great notions, I am not
forgetting the aid which from our earliest years we
receive from teachers, nor am I denying the influence of
certain original forms of thinking or formative ideas,
connatural with our minds, without which we could not
reason at all. I am only contemplating the mind as it
moves in fact, by whatever hidden mechanism; as a
locomotive engine could not move without steam, but
still, under whatever number of forces, it certainly does
start from Birmingham and does arrive in London.
</p>

<p>
4. And so again, as regards the first principles
expressed in such propositions as <q>There is a right and
a wrong,</q> <q>a true and a false,</q> <q>a just and an
unjust,</q> <q>a beautiful and a deformed;</q> they are
abstractions to which we give a notional assent in
consequence of our particular experiences of qualities in
the concrete, to which we give a real assent. As we
form our notion of whiteness from the actual sight of
snow, milk, a lily, or a cloud, so, after experiencing the
sentiment of approbation which arises in us on the sight
of certain acts one by one, we go on to assign to that
sentiment a cause, and to those acts a quality, and we
give to this notional cause or quality the name of virtue,
which is an abstraction, not a thing. And in like
manner, when we have been affected by a certain specific
admiring pleasure at the sight of this or that concrete
object, we proceed by an arbitrary act of the mind to
give a name to the hypothetical cause or quality in the
abstract, which excites it. We speak of it as beautifulness,
and henceforth, when we call a thing beautiful, we
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
mean by the word nothing else than a certain quality of
things which creates in us this special sensation.
</p>

<p>
These so-called first principles, I say, are really conclusions
or abstractions from particular experiences;
and an assent to their existence is not an assent to
things or their images, but to notions, real assent being
confined to the propositions directly embodying those
experiences. Such notions indeed are an evidence of
the reality of the special sentiments in particular
instances, without which they would not have been
formed; but in themselves they are abstractions from
facts, not elementary truths prior to reasoning.
</p>

<p>
I am not of course dreaming of denying the objective
existence of the Moral Law, nor our instinctive recognition
of the immutable difference in the moral quality of
acts, as elicited in us by one instance of them. Even one
act of cruelty, ingratitude, generosity, or justice reveals
to us at once <foreign rend='italic'>intensivè</foreign> the immutable distinction between
those qualities and their contraries; that is, in that
particular instance and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pro hac vice</foreign>.
From such experience&mdash;an
experience which is ever recurring&mdash;we proceed
to abstract and generalize; and thus the abstract proposition
<q>There is a right and a wrong,</q> as representing
an act of inference, is received by the mind with a
notional, not a real assent. However, in proportion as
we obey the particular dictates which are its tokens, so
are we led on more and more to view it in the association
of those particulars, which are real, and virtually to
change our notion of it into the image of that objective
fact, which in each particular case it undeniably is.
</p>

<p>
5. Another of these presumptions is the belief in
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
causation. It is to me a perplexity that grave authors
seem to enunciate as an intuitive truth, that every thing
must have a cause. If this were so, the voice of nature
would tell false; for why in that case stop short at One,
who is Himself without cause? The assent which we
give to the proposition, as a first principle, that nothing
happens without a cause, is derived, in the first instance,
from what we know of ourselves; and we argue analogically
from what is within us to what is external to
us. One of the first experiences of an infant is that of
his willing and doing; and, as time goes on, one of the
first temptations of the boy is to bring home to himself
the fact of his sovereign arbitrary power, though it be at
the price of waywardness, mischievousness, and disobedience.
And when his parents, as antagonists of this
wilfulness, begin to restrain him, and to bring his mind
and conduct into shape, then he has a second series of
experiences of cause and effect, and that upon a principle
or rule. Thus the notion of causation is one of the first
lessons which he learns from experience, that experience
limiting it to agents possessed of intelligence and will.
It is the notion of power combined with a purpose and
an end. Physical phenomena, as such, are without
sense; and experience teaches us nothing about physical
phenomena as causes. Accordingly, wherever the world
is young, the movements and changes of physical nature
have been and are spontaneously ascribed by its people
to the presence and will of hidden agents, who haunt
every part of it, the woods, the mountains and the
streams, the air and the stars, for good or for evil;&mdash;just
as children again, by beating the ground after falling,
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
imply that what has bruised them has intelligence;&mdash;nor
is there anything illogical in such a belief. It rests on
the argument from analogy.
</p>

<p>
As time goes on, and society is formed, and the idea
of science is mastered, a different aspect of the physical
universe presents itself to the mind. Since causation
implies a sequence of acts in our own case, and our
doing is always posterior, never contemporaneous or
prior, to our willing, therefore, when we witness
invariable antecedents and consequents, we call the
former the cause of the latter, though intelligence is
absent, from the analogy of external appearances. At
length we go on to confuse causation with order; and,
because we happen to have made a successful analysis of
some complicated assemblage of phenomena, which experience
has brought before us in the visible scene of
things, and have reduced them to a tolerable dependence
on each other, we call the ultimate points of this
analysis, and the hypothetical facts in which the whole
mass of phenomena is gathered up, by the name of causes,
whereas they are really only the formula under which
those phenomena are conveniently represented. Thus the
constitutional formula, <q>The king can do no wrong,</q>
is not a fact, or a cause of the Constitution, but a happy
mode of bringing out its genius, of determining the
correlations of its elements, and of grouping or regulating
political rules and proceedings in a particular
direction and in a particular form. And in like manner,
that all the particles of matter throughout the universe
are attracted to each other with a force varying inversely
with the square of their respective distances, is a profound
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
idea, harmonizing the physical works of the Creator;
but even could it be proved to be a universal fact, and
also to be the actual cause of the movements of all bodies
in the universe, still it would not be an experience, any
more than is the mythological doctrine of the presence of
innumerable spirits in physical phenomena.
</p>

<p>
Of these two senses of the word <q>cause,</q> viz. that
which brings a thing to be, and that on which a thing
under given circumstances follows, the former is that of
which our experience is the earlier and more intimate,
being suggested to us by our consciousness of willing
and doing. The latter of the two requires a discrimination
and exactness of thought for its apprehension,
which implies special mental training; else, how do we
learn to call food the cause of refreshment, but day never
the cause of night, though night follows day more surely
than refreshment follows food? Starting, then, from
experience, I consider a cause to be an effective will;
and, by the doctrine of causation, I mean the notion, or
first principle, that all things come of effective will;
and the reception or presumption of this notion is a
notional assent.
</p>

<p>
6. As to causation in the second sense (viz. an ordinary
succession of antecedents and consequents, or what
is called the Order of Nature), when so explained, it falls
under the doctrine of general laws; and of this I proceed
to make mention, as another first principle or notion,
derived by us from experience, and accepted with what
I have called a presumption. By natural law I mean
the fact that things happen uniformly according to certain
circumstances, and not without them and at random:
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
that is, that they happen in an order; and, as all
things in the universe are unit and individual, order
implies a certain repetition, whether of things or like
things, or of their affections and relations. Thus we
have experience, for instance, of the regularity of our
physical functions, such as the beating of the pulse and
the heaving of the breath; of the recurring sensations of
hunger and thirst; of the alternation of waking and
sleeping, and the succession of youth and age. In like
manner we have experience of the great recurring phenomena
of the heavens and earth, of day and night, summer
and winter. Also, we have experience of a like
uniform succession in the instance of fire burning, water
choking, stones falling down and not up, iron moving
towards a magnet, friction followed by sparks and crackling,
an oar looking bent in the stream, and compressed
steam bursting its vessel. Also, by scientific analysis,
we are led to the conclusion that phenomena, which
seem very different from each other, admit of being
grouped together as modes of the operation of one hypothetical
law, acting under varied circumstances. For
instance, the motion of a stone falling freely, of a projectile,
and of a planet, may be generalized as one and
the same property, in each of them, of the particles of
matter; and this generalization loses its character of
hypothesis, and becomes a probability, in proportion as
we have reason for thinking on other grounds that the
particles of all matter really move and act towards each
other in one certain way in relation to space and time,
and not in half a dozen ways; that is, that nature acts
by uniform laws. And thus we advance to the general
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
notion or first principle of the sovereignty of law throughout
the universe.
</p>

<p>
There are philosophers who go farther, and teach, not
only a general, but an invariable, and inviolable, and
necessary uniformity in the action of the laws of nature,
holding that every thing is the result of some law or
laws, and that exceptions are impossible; but I do not
see on what ground of experience or reason they take up
this position. Our experience rather is adverse to
such a doctrine, for what concrete fact or phenomenon
exactly repeats itself? Some abstract conception of
it, more perfect than the recurrent phenomenon itself,
is necessary, before we are able to say that it has happened
even twice, and the variations which accompany
the repetition are of the nature of exceptions.
The earth, for instance, never moves exactly in the same
orbit year by year, but is in perpetual vacillation. It
will, indeed, be replied that this arises from the interaction
of one law with another, of which the actual
orbit is only the accidental issue, that the earth is under
the influence of a variety of attractions from cosmical
bodies, and that, if it is subject to continual aberrations
in its course, these are accounted for accurately or sufficiently
by the presence of those extraordinary and variable
attractions:&mdash;science, then, by its analytical processes
sets right the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign> confusion. Of
course; still let us not by our words imply that we are appealing
to experience, when really we are only accounting,
and that by hypothesis, for the absence of experience.
The confusion is a fact, the reasoning processes are not
facts. The extraordinary attractions assigned to account
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
for our experience of that confusion are not themselves
experienced phenomenal facts, but more or less
probable hypotheses, argued out by means of an assumed
analogy between the cosmical bodies to which those
attractions are referred and falling bodies on the earth.
I say <q>assumed,</q> because that analogy (in other words,
the unfailing uniformity of nature) is the very point
which has to be proved. It is true, that we can make
experiment of the law of attraction in the case of bodies
on the earth; but, I repeat, to assume from analogy
that, as stones do fall to the earth, so Jupiter, if let
alone, would fall upon the earth and the earth upon
Jupiter, and with certain peculiarities of velocity on
either side, is to have recourse to an explanation which
is not necessarily valid, unless nature is necessarily
uniform. Nor, indeed, has it yet been proved, nor
ought it to be assumed, even that the law of velocity of
falling bodies on the earth is invariable in its operation;
for that again is only an instance of the general proposition,
which is the very thesis in debate. It seems
safer then to hold that the order of nature is not necessary,
but general in its manifestations.
</p>

<p>
But, it may be urged, if a thing happens once, it must
happen always; for what is to hinder it? Nay, on the
contrary, why, because one particle of matter has a certain
property, should all particles have the same? Why,
because particles have instanced the property a thousand
times, should the thousand and first instance it also?
It is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign>
unaccountable that an accident should
happen twice, not to speak of its happening always. If
we expect a thing to happen twice, it is because we think
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
it is not an accident, but has a cause. What has brought
about a thing once, may bring it about twice. <emph>What</emph> is
to hinder its happening? rather, What is to make it
happen? Here we are thrown back from the question
of Order to that of Causation. A law is not a cause,
but a fact; but when we come to the question of cause,
then, as I have said, we have no experience of any cause
but Will. If, then, I must answer the question, What
is to alter the order of nature? I reply, That which
willed it;&mdash;That which willed it, can unwill it; and the
invariableness of law depends on the unchangeableness
of that Will.
</p>

<p>
And here I am led to observe that, as a cause implies
a will, so order implies a purpose. Did we see flint celts,
in their various receptacles all over Europe, scored always
with certain special and characteristic marks, even though
those marks had no assignable meaning or final cause
whatever, we should take that very repetition, which
indeed is the principle of order, to be a proof of intelligence.
The agency then which has kept up and keeps
up the general laws of nature, energizing at once in
Sirius and on the earth, and on the earth in its primary
period as well as in the nineteenth century, must be
Mind, and nothing else, and Mind at least as wide and
as enduring in its living action, as the immeasurable
ages and spaces of the universe on which that agency
has left its traces.
</p>

<p>
In these remarks I have digressed from my immediate
subject, but they have some bearing on points which will
subsequently come into discussion.
</p>

<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Speculation.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Speculation is one of those words which, in the vernacular,
have so different a sense from what they bear
in philosophy. It is commonly taken to mean a conjecture,
or a venture on chances; but its proper meaning
is mental sight, or the contemplation of mental operations
and their results as opposed to experience, experiment,
or sense, analogous to its meaning in Shakspeare's
line, <q>Thou hast no speculation in those eyes.</q> In this
sense I use it here.
</p>

<p>
And I use it in this sense to denote those notional
assents which are the most direct, explicit, and perfect of
their kind, viz. those which are the firm, conscious acceptance
of propositions as true. This kind of assent
includes the assent to all reasoning and its conclusions,
to all general propositions, to all rules of conduct, to all
proverbs, aphorisms, sayings, and reflections on men and
society. Of course mathematical investigations and
truths are the subjects of this speculative assent. So are
legal judgments, and constitutional maxims, as far as
they appeal to us for assent. So are the determinations of
science; so are the principles, disputations, and doctrines
of theology. That there is a God, that He has certain
attributes, and in what sense He can be said to have
attributes, that He has done certain works, that He has
made certain revelations of Himself and of His will, and
what they are, and the multiplied bearings of the parts
of the teaching, thus developed and formed, upon each
other, all this is the subject of notional assent, and of
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
that particular department of it which I have called
Speculation. As far as these particular subjects can be
viewed in the concrete and represent experiences, they
can be received by real assent also; but as expressed in
general propositions they belong to notional apprehension
and assent.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 2. Real Assents.</head>

<p>
I have in a measure anticipated the subject of Real
Assent by what I have been saying about Notional. In
comparison of the directness and force of the apprehension,
which we have of an object, when our assent is to
be called real, Notional Assent and Inference seem to be
thrown back into one and the same class of intellectual
acts, though the former of the two is always an unconditional
acceptance of a proposition, and the latter is an
acceptance on the condition of an acceptance of its premisses.
In its notional assents as well as in its inferences,
the mind contemplates its own creations instead of things;
in real, it is directed towards things, represented by the
impressions which they have left on the imagination.
These images, when assented-to, have an influence both
on the individual and on society, which mere notions
cannot exert.
</p>

<p>
I have already given various illustrations of Real
Assent; I will follow them up here by some instances
of the change of Notional Assent into Real.
</p>

<p>
1. For instance: boys at school look like each other,
and pursue the same studies, some of them with greater
success than others; but it will sometimes happen, that
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
those who acquitted themselves but poorly in class,
when they come into the action of life, and engage in
some particular work, which they have already been
learning in its theory and with little promise of proficiency,
are suddenly found to have what is called an
eye for that work&mdash;an eye for trade matters, or for engineering,
or a special taste for literature&mdash;which no one
expected from them at school, while they were engaged
on notions. Minds of this stamp not only know the
received rules of their profession, but enter into them,
and even anticipate them, or dispense with them, or
substitute other rules instead. And when new questions
are opened, and arguments are drawn up on one side
and the other in long array, they with a natural ease
and promptness form their views and give their decision,
as if they had no need to reason, from their clear apprehension
of the lie and issue of the whole matter in dispute,
as if it were drawn out in a map before them.
These are the reformers, systematizers, inventors, in
various departments of thought, speculative and practical;
in education, in administration, in social and political
matters, in science. Such men indeed are far from
infallible; however great their powers, they sometimes
fall into great errors, in their own special department,
while second-rate men who go by rule come to sound
and safe conclusions. Images need not be true; but I
am illustrating what vividness of apprehension is, and
what is the strength of belief consequent upon it.
</p>

<p>
2. Again:&mdash;twenty years ago, the Duke of Wellington
wrote his celebrated letter on the subject of the national
defences. His authority gave it an immediate circulation
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
among all classes of the community; none questioned
what he said, nor as if taking his words on faith merely,
but as intellectually recognizing their truth; yet few
could be said to see or feel that truth. His letter lay,
so to say, upon the pure intellect of the national mind,
and nothing for a time came of it. But eleven years
afterwards, after his death, the anger of the French
colonels with us, after the attempt upon Louis Napoleon's
life, transferred its facts to the charge of the
imagination. Then forthwith the national assent became
in various ways an operative principle, especially in its
promotion of the volunteer movement. The Duke,
having a special eye for military matters, had realized
the state of things from the first; but it took a course
of years to impress upon the public mind an assent to
his warning deeper and more energetic than the reception
it is accustomed to give to a clever article in a newspaper
or a review.
</p>

<p>
3. And so generally: great truths, practical or ethical,
float on the surface of society, admitted by all, valued
by few, exemplifying the poet's adage, <q>Probitas laudatur
et alget,</q> until changed circumstances, accident,
or the continual pressure of their advocates, force them
upon its attention. The iniquity, for instance, of the
slave-trade ought to have been acknowledged by all men
from the first; it was acknowledged by many, but it
needed an organized agitation, with tracts and speeches
innumerable, so to affect the imagination of men as
to make their acknowledgment of that iniquitousness
operative.
</p>

<p>
In like manner, when Mr. Wilberforce, after succeeding
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
in the slave question, urged the Duke of Wellington
to use his great influence in discountenancing duelling,
he could only get from him in answer, <q>A relic of
barbarism, Mr. Wilberforce;</q> as if he accepted a notion
without realizing a fact: at length, the growing intelligence
of the community, and the shock inflicted upon it
by the tragical circumstances of a particular duel, were
fatal to that barbarism. The governing classes were
roused from their dreamy acquiescence in an abstract
truth, and recognized the duty of giving it practical
expression.
</p>

<p>
4. Let us consider, too, how differently young and old
are affected by the words of some classic author, such as
Homer or Horace. Passages, which to a boy are but
rhetorical commonplaces, neither better nor worse than
a hundred others which any clever writer might supply,
which he gets by heart and thinks very fine, and
imitates, as he thinks, successfully, in his own flowing
versification, at length come home to him, when long
years have passed, and he has had experience of life, and
pierce him, as if he had never before known them, with
their sad earnestness and vivid exactness. Then he
comes to understand how it is that lines, the birth of
some chance morning or evening at an Ionian festival,
or among the Sabine hills, have lasted generation after
generation, for thousands of years, with a power over
the mind, and a charm, which the current literature of
his own day, with all its obvious advantages, is utterly
unable to rival. Perhaps this is the reason of the
medieval opinion about Virgil, as if a prophet or magician;
his single words and phrases, his pathetic half
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
lines, giving utterance, as the voice of Nature herself,
to that pain and weariness, yet hope of better things,
which is the experience of her children in every time.
</p>

<p>
5. And what the experience of the world effects for
the illustration of classical authors, that office the religious
sense, carefully cultivated, fulfils towards Holy
Scripture. To the devout and spiritual, the Divine Word
speaks of things, not merely of notions. And, again, to
the disconsolate, the tempted, the perplexed, the suffering,
there comes, by means of their very trials, an
enlargement of thought, which enables them to see in it
what they never saw before. Henceforth there is to
them a reality in its teachings, which they recognize as
an argument, and the best of arguments, for its divine
origin. Hence the practice of meditation on the Sacred
Text, so highly thought of by Catholics. Reading, as
we do, the Gospels from our youth up, we are in danger
of becoming so familiar with them as to be dead to their
force, and to view them as a mere history. The purpose,
then, of meditation is to realize them; to make the facts
which they relate stand out before our minds as objects,
such as may be appropriated by a faith as living as the
imagination which apprehends them.
</p>

<p>
It is obvious to refer to the unworthy use made of the
more solemn parts of the sacred volume by the mere
popular preacher. His very mode of reading, whether
warnings or prayers, is as if he thought them to be little
more than fine writing, poetical in sense, musical in sound,
and worthy of inspiration. The most awful truths are
to him but sublime or beautiful conceptions, and are
adduced and used by him, in season and out of season,
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
for his own purposes, for embellishing his style or
rounding his periods. But let his heart at length be
ploughed by some keen grief or deep anxiety, and Scripture
is a new book to him. This is the change which so
often takes place in what is called religious conversion,
and it is a change so far simply for the better, by whatever
infirmity or error it is in the particular case
accompanied. And it is strikingly suggested to us, to
take a saintly example, in the confession of the patriarch
Job, when he contrasts his apprehension of the Almighty
before and after his afflictions. He says he had indeed
a true apprehension of the Divine Attributes before
as well as after; but with the trial came a great
change in the character of that apprehension:&mdash;<q>With
the hearing of the ear,</q> he says, <q>I have heard Thee,
but now mine eye seeth Thee; therefore I reprehend
myself, and do penance in dust and ashes.</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Let these instances suffice of Real Assent in its relation
to Notional; they lead me to make three remarks in
further illustration of its character.
</p>

<p>
1. The fact of the distinctness of the images, which are
required for real assent, is no warrant for the existence
of the objects which those images represent. A proposition,
be it ever so keenly apprehended, may be true or
may be false. If we simply put aside all inferential
information, such as is derived from testimony, from
general belief, from the concurrence of the senses, from
common sense, or otherwise, we have no right to consider
that we have apprehended a truth, merely because
of the strength of our mental impression of it. Hence
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
the proverb, <q>Fronti nulla fides.</q> An image, with the
characters of perfect veracity and faithfulness, may be
ever so distinct and eloquent an object presented before
the mind (or, as it is sometimes called, an <q>objectum
internum,</q> or a <q>subject-object</q>); but, nevertheless,
there may be no external reality in the case, corresponding
to it, in spite of its impressiveness. One of the
most remarkable instances of this fallacious impressiveness
is the illusion which possesses the minds of able
men, those especially who are exercised in physical investigations,
in favour of the inviolability of the laws of
nature. Philosophers of the school of Hume discard the
very supposition of miracles, and scornfully refuse to
hear evidence in their behalf in given instances, from
their intimate experience of physical order and of the
ever-recurring connexion of antecedent and consequent.
Their imagination usurps the functions of reason; and
they cannot bring themselves even to entertain as a hypothesis
(and this is all that they are asked to do) a thought
contrary to that vivid impression of which they are the
victims, that the uniformity of nature, which they witness
hour by hour, is equivalent to a necessary, inviolable law.
</p>

<p>
Yet it is plain, and I shall take it for granted here,
that when I assent to a proposition, I ought to have
some more legitimate reason for doing so, than the brilliancy
of the image of which that proposition is the
expression. That I have no experience of a thing
happening except in one way, is a cause of the intensity
of my assent, if I assent, but not the reason of my assenting.
In saying this, I am not disposed to deny the
presence in some men of an idiosyncratic sagacity, which
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
really and rightly sees reasons in impressions which
common men cannot see, and is secured from the peril
of confusing truth with make-belief; but this is genius,
and beyond rule. I grant too, of course, that accidentally
impressiveness does in matter of fact, as in the
instance which I have been giving, constitute the motive
principle of belief; for the mind is ever exposed to the
danger of being carried away by the liveliness of its
conceptions, to the sacrifice of good sense and conscientious
caution, and the greater and the more rare are its
gifts, the greater is the risk of swerving from the line of
reason and duty; but here I am not speaking of transgressions
of rule any more than of exceptions to it, but
of the normal constitution of our minds, and of the
natural and rightful effect of acts of the imagination
upon us, and this is, not to create assent, but to intensify
it.
</p>

<p>
2. Next, Assent, however strong, and accorded to
images however vivid, is not therefore necessarily practical.
Strictly speaking, it is not imagination that
causes action; but hope and fear, likes and dislikes,
appetite, passion, affection, the stirrings of selfishness
and self-love. What imagination does for us is to find
a means of stimulating those motive powers; and it
does so by providing a supply of objects strong enough
to stimulate them. The thought of honour, glory, duty,
self-aggrandisement, gain, or on the other hand of
Divine Goodness, future reward, eternal life, perseveringly
dwelt upon, leads us along a course of action
corresponding to itself, but only in case there be that in
our minds which is congenial to it. However, when
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
there is that preparation of mind, the thought does lead
to the act. Hence it is that the fact of a proposition
being accepted with a real assent is accidentally an
earnest of that proposition being carried out in conduct,
and the imagination may be said in some sense to be of
a practical nature, inasmuch as it leads to practice indirectly
by the action of its object upon the affections.
</p>

<p>
3. There is a third remark suggested by the view
which I have been taking of real assents, viz. that they
are of a personal character, each individual having his
own, and being known by them. It is otherwise with
notions; notional apprehension is in itself an ordinary
act of our common nature. All of us have the power of
abstraction, and can be taught either to make or to enter
into the same abstractions; and thus to co-operate in
the establishment of a common measure between mind
and mind. And, though for one and all of us to assent
to the notions which we thus apprehend in common, is
a further step, as requiring the adoption of a common
stand-point of principle and judgment, yet this too
depends in good measure on certain logical processes of
thought, with which we are all familiar, and on facts
which we all take for granted. But we cannot make
sure, for ourselves or others, of real apprehension and
assent, because we have to secure first the images which
are their objects, and these are often peculiar and special.
They depend on personal experience; and the experience
of one man is not the experience of another. Real
assent, then, as the experience which it presupposes, is
proper to the individual, and, as such, thwarts rather
than promotes the intercourse of man with man. It
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
shuts itself up, as it were, in its own home, or at least it
is its own witness and its own standard; and, as in the
instances above given, it cannot be reckoned on, anticipated,
accounted for, inasmuch as it is the accident of
this man or that.
</p>

<p>
I call the characteristics of an individual accidents, in
spite of the universal reign of law, because they are
severally the co-incidents of many laws, and there are
no laws as yet discovered of such coincidence. A man
who is run over in the street and killed, in one sense
suffers according to rule or law; he was crossing, he was
short-sighted or preoccupied in mind, or he was looking
another way; he was deaf, lame, or flurried; and the cab
came up at a great pace. If all this was so, it was by a
necessity that he was run over; it would have been a
miracle if he had escaped. So far is clear; but what is
not clear is how all these various conditions met together
in the particular case, how it was that a man, short-sighted,
hard of hearing, deficient in presence of mind,
happened to get in the way of a cab hurrying along to
catch a train. This concrete fact does not come under
any law of sudden deaths, but, like the earth's yearly
path which I spoke of above, is the accident of the
individual.
</p>

<p>
It does not meet the case to refer to the law of
averages, for such laws deal with percentages, not with
individuals, and it is about individuals that I am speaking.
That this particular man out of the three millions
congregated in the metropolis, was to have the experience
of this catastrophe, and to be the select victim to
appease that law of averages, no statistical tables could
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
foretell, even though they could determine that it was
in the fates that in that week or day some four persons
in the length and breadth of London should be run over.
And in like manner that this or that person should have
the particular experiences necessary for real assent on
any point, that the Deist should become a Theist, the
Erastian a Catholic, the Protectionist a Free-trader, the
Conservative a Legitimist, the high Tory an out-and-out
Democrat, are facts, each of which may be the result of
a multitude of coincidences in one and the same individual,
coincidences which we have no means of determining,
and which, therefore, we may call accidents.
For&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>There's a Divinity that shapes our ends,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Rough hew them how we will.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Such accidents are the characteristics of persons, as
<foreign rend='italic'>differentiæ</foreign>
and properties are the characteristics of species
or natures.
</p>

<p>
That a man dies when deprived of air, is not an accident
of his person, but a law of his nature; that he
cannot live without quinine or opium, or out of the
climate of Madeira, is his own peculiarity. If all men
every where usually had the yellow fever once in their
lives, we should call it (speaking according to our knowledge)
a law of the human constitution; if the inhabitants
of a particular country commonly had it, we should
call it a law of the climate; if a healthy man has a fever
in a healthy place, in a healthy season, we call it an accident,
though it be reducible to the coincidence of laws,
because there is no known law of their coincidence. To
be rational, to have speech, to pass through successive
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
changes of mind and body from infancy to death, belong
to man's nature; to have a particular history, to be
married or single, to have children or to be childless, to
live a given number of years, to have a certain constitution,
moral temperament, intellectual outfit, mental formation,
these and the like, taken all together, are the
accidents which make up our notion of a man's person,
and are the ground-work or condition of his particular
experiences.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, various of the experiences which befall
this man may be the same as those which befall that,
although those experiences result each from the combination
of its own accidents, and are ultimately traceable
each to its own special condition or history. That is,
images which are possessed in common, with their apprehensions
and assents, may nevertheless be personal
characteristics. If two or three hundred men are to be
found, who cannot live out of Madeira, that inability
would still be an accident and a peculiarity of each of
them. Even if in each case it implied delicacy of lungs,
still that delicacy is a vague notion, comprehending
under it a great variety of cases in detail. If <q>five
hundred brethren at once</q> saw our risen Lord, that
common experience would not be a law, but a personal
accident which was the prerogative of each. And so
again in this day the belief of so many thousands in
His Divinity, is not therefore notional, because it is
common, but may be a real and personal belief, being
produced in different individual minds by various experiences
and disposing causes, variously combined; such
as a warm or strong imagination, great sensibility,
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
compunction and horror at sin, frequenting the Mass
and other rites of the Church, meditating on the contents
of the Gospels, familiarity with hymns and religious
poems, dwelling on the Evidences, parental example and
instruction, religious friends, strange providences, powerful
preaching. In each case the image in the mind,
with the experiences out of which it is formed, would be
a personal result; and, though the same in all, would in
each case be so idiosyncratic in its circumstances, that
it would stand by itself, a special formation, unconnected
with any law; though at the same time it would necessarily
be a principle of sympathy and a bond of intercourse
between those whose minds had been thus
variously wrought into a common assent, far stronger
than could follow upon any multitude of mere notions
which they unanimously held. And even when that
assent is not the result of concurrent causes, if such a
case is possible, but has one single origin, as the study
of Scripture, careful teaching, or a religious temper, still
its presence argues a special history, and a personal formation,
which an abstraction does not. For an abstraction
can be made at will, and may be the work of a
moment; but the moral experiences which perpetuate
themselves in images, must be sought after in order to
be found, and encouraged and cultivated in order to
be appropriated.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I have now said all that occurs to me on the subject of
Real Assents, perhaps not without some risk of subtlety
and minuteness. They are sometimes called beliefs,
convictions, certitudes; and, as given to moral objects,
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
they are perhaps as rare as they are powerful. Till we
have them, in spite of a full apprehension and assent
in the field of notions, we have no intellectual moorings,
and are at the mercy of impulses, fancies, and wandering
lights, whether as regards personal conduct, social and
political action, or religion. These beliefs, be they true
or false in the particular case, form the mind out of
which they grow, and impart to it a seriousness and
manliness which inspires in other minds a confidence in
its views, and is one secret of persuasiveness and influence
in the public stage of the world. They create, as
the case may be, heroes and saints, great leaders, statesmen,
preachers, and reformers, the pioneers of discovery
in science, visionaries, fanatics, knight-errants, demagogues,
and adventurers. They have given to the world
men of one idea, of immense energy, of adamantine will,
of revolutionary power. They kindle sympathies between
man and man, and knit together the innumerable
units which constitute a race and a nation. They
become the principle of its political existence; they
impart to it homogeneity of thought and fellowship of
purpose. They have given form to the medieval theocracy
and to the Mahometan superstition; they are now
the life both of <q>Holy Russia,</q> and of that freedom of
speech and action which is the special boast of Englishmen.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 3. Notional and Real Assents Contrasted.</head>

<p>
It appears from what has been said, that, though Real
Assent is not intrinsically operative, it accidentally and
indirectly affects practice. It is in itself an intellectual
act, of which the object is presented to it by the imagination;
and though the pure intellect does not lead to
action, nor the imagination either, yet the imagination
has the means, which pure intellect has not, of stimulating
those powers of the mind from which action
proceeds. Real Assent then, or Belief, as it may be
called, viewed in itself, that is, simply as Assent, does
not lead to action; but the images in which it lives,
representing as they do the concrete, have the power of
the concrete upon the affections and passions, and by
means of these indirectly become operative. Still this
practical influence is not invariable, nor to be relied on;
for given images may have no tendency to affect given
minds, or to excite them to action. Thus, a philosopher
or a poet may vividly realize the brilliant rewards of
military genius or of eloquence, without wishing either
to be a commander or an orator. However, on the
whole, broadly contrasting Belief with Notional Assent
and with Inference, we shall not, with this explanation,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
be very wrong in pronouncing that acts of Notional
Assent and of Inference do not affect our conduct, and
acts of Belief, that is, of Real Assent, do (not necessarily,
but do) affect it.
</p>

<p>
I have scarcely spoken of Inference since my Introductory
Chapter, though I intend, before I conclude, to
consider it fully; but I have said enough to admit of my
introducing it here in contrast with Real Assent or
Belief, and that contrast is necessary in order to complete
what I have been saying about the latter. Let
me then, for the sake of the latter, be allowed here to
say, that, while Assent, or Belief, presupposes some
apprehension of the things believed, Inference requires
no apprehension of the things inferred; that in consequence,
Inference is necessarily concerned with surfaces
and aspects; that it begins with itself, and ends with
itself; that it does not reach as far as facts; that it is
employed upon formulas; that, as far as it takes real
objects of whatever kind into account, such as motives
and actions, character and conduct, art, science, taste,
morals, religion, it deals with them, not as they are, but
simply in its own line, as materials of argument or inquiry,
that they are to it nothing more than major and
minor premisses and conclusions. Belief, on the other
hand, being concerned with things concrete, not abstract,
which variously excite the mind from their moral and
imaginative properties, has for its object, not only
directly what is true, but inclusively what is beautiful,
useful, admirable, heroic; objects which kindle devotion,
rouse the passions, and attach the affections; and thus it
leads the way to actions of every kind, to the establishment
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
of principles, and the formation of character, and
is thus again intimately connected with what is individual
and personal.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I insisted on this marked distinction between Beliefs
on the one hand, and Notional Assents and Inferences
on the other, many years ago in words which it will be
to my purpose to use now.<note place='foot'>Vide <q>Discussions
and Arguments on Various Subjects,</q> art. 4.</note> I quote them, because, over
and above their appositeness in this place, they present
the doctrine on which I have been insisting, from a
second point of view, and with a freshness and force
which I cannot now command, and, moreover, (though
they are my own, nevertheless, from the length of time
which has elapsed since their publication,) almost with
the cogency of an independent testimony.
</p>

<p>
They occur in a protest which I had occasion to write
in February, 1841, against a dangerous doctrine maintained,
as I considered, by two very eminent men of
that day, now no more&mdash;Lord Brougham and Sir Robert
Peel. That doctrine was to the effect that the claims
of religion could be secured and sustained in the mass of
men, and in particular in the lower classes of society, by
acquaintance with literature and physical science, and
through the instrumentality of Mechanics' Institutes
and Reading Rooms, to the serious disparagement, as it
seemed to me, of direct Christian instruction. In the
course of my remarks is found the passage which I shall
here quote, and which, with whatever differences in
terminology, and hardihood of assertion, befitting the
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
circumstances of its publication, nay, as far as words go,
inaccuracy of theological statement, suitably illustrates
the subject here under discussion. It runs thus:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>People say to me, that it is but a dream to suppose
that Christianity should regain the organic power in
human society which once it possessed. I cannot help
that; I never said it could. I am not a politician; I
am proposing no measures, but exposing a fallacy and
resisting a pretence. Let Benthamism reign, if men
have no aspirations; but do not tell them to be romantic
and then solace them with <q>glory:</q> do not attempt by
philosophy what once was done by religion. The ascendency
of faith may be impracticable, but the reign of
knowledge is incomprehensible. The problem for statesmen
of this age is how to educate the masses, and literature
and science cannot give the solution.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Science gives us the grounds or premisses from
which religious truths are to be enforced; but it does not
set about inferring them, much less does it reach the
inference&mdash;that is not its province. It brings before us
phenomena, and it leaves us, if we will, to call them
works of design, wisdom, or benevolence; and further
still, if we will, to proceed to confess an Intelligent
Creator. We have to take its facts, and to give them a
meaning, and to draw our own conclusions from them.
First comes knowledge, then a view, then reasoning,
and then belief. This is why science has so little of a
religious tendency; deductions have no power of persuasion.
The heart is commonly reached, not through
the reason, but through the imagination, by means of
direct impressions, by the testimony of facts and events,
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
by history, by description. Persons influence us, voices
melt us, looks subdue us, deeds inflame us. Many a
man will live and die upon a dogma: no man will be a
martyr for a conclusion. A conclusion is but an opinion;
it is not a thing which <emph>is</emph>, but which we are <q><emph>quite sure
about</emph>;</q> and it has often been observed, that we never say
we are sure and certain without implying that we doubt.
To say that a thing <emph>must</emph> be, is to admit that it <emph>may not</emph>
be. No one, I say, will die for his own calculations: he
dies for realities. This is why a literary religion is so
little to be depended upon; it looks well in fair weather;
but its doctrines are opinions, and, when called to suffer
for them, it slips them between its folios, or burns them
at its hearth. And this again is the secret of the distrust
and raillery with which moralists have been so commonly
visited. They say and do not. Why? Because they
are contemplating the fitness of things, and they live by
the square, when they should be realizing their high
maxims in the concrete. Now Sir Robert Peel thinks
better of natural history, chemistry, and astronomy than
of such ethics; but these too, what are they more than
divinity <foreign rend='italic'>in posse</foreign>?
He protests against <q><emph>controversial</emph>
divinity:</q> is <emph>inferential</emph> much better?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have no confidence, then, in philosophers who cannot
help being religious, and are Christians by implication.
They sit at home, and reach forward to distances
which astonish us; but they hit without grasping, and
are sometimes as confident about shadows as about realities.
They have worked out by a calculation the lie of a
country which they never saw, and mapped it by means
of a gazetteer; and, like blind men, though they can
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
put a stranger on his way, they cannot walk straight
themselves, and do not feel it quite their business to
walk at all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Logic makes but a sorry rhetoric with the multitude;
first shoot round corners, and you may not despair of
converting by a syllogism. Tell men to gain notions of
a Creator from His works, and, if they were to set about
it (which nobody does) they would be jaded and wearied
by the labyrinth they were tracing. Their minds would
be gorged and surfeited by the logical operation. Logicians
are more set upon concluding rightly, than on right
conclusions. They cannot see the end for the process.
Few men have that power of mind which may hold fast
and firmly a variety of thoughts. We ridicule 'men of
one idea;' but a great many of us are born to be such,
and we should be happier if we knew it. To most men
argument makes the point in hand only more doubtful,
and considerably less impressive. After all, man is <emph>not</emph> a
reasoning animal; he is a seeing, feeling, contemplating,
acting animal. He is influenced by what is direct and
precise. It is very well to freshen our impressions and
convictions from physics, but to create them we must go
elsewhere. Sir Robert Peel <q>never can think it possible
that a mind can be so constituted, that, after being
familiarized with the wonderful discoveries which have
been made in every part of experimental science, it can
retire from such contemplation without more enlarged
conceptions of God's providence, and a higher reverence
for His Name!</q> If he speaks of religious minds, he perpetrates
a truism; if of irreligious, he insinuates a paradox.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Life is not long enough for a religion of inferences;
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
we shall never have done beginning, if we determine
to begin with proof. We shall ever be laying our
foundations; we shall turn theology into evidences,
and divines into textuaries. We shall never get at
our first principles. Resolve to believe nothing, and
you must prove your proof and analyze your elements,
sinking farther and farther, and finding <q>in
the lowest depth a lower deep,</q> till you come to the
broad bosom of scepticism. I would rather be bound
to defend the reasonableness of assuming that Christianity
is true, than to demonstrate a moral governance
from the physical world. Life is for action. If
we insist on proofs for every thing, we shall never
come to action: to act you must assume, and that
assumption is faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Let no one suppose, that in saying this I am maintaining
that all proofs are equally difficult, and all propositions
equally debatable. Some assumptions are greater
than others, and some doctrines involve postulates larger
than others, and more numerous. I only say, that impressions
lead to action, and that reasonings lead from it.
Knowledge of premisses, and inferences upon them,&mdash;this
is not to <emph>live</emph>. It is very well as a matter of liberal
curiosity and of philosophy to analyze our modes of
thought: but let this come second, and when there is
leisure for it, and then our examinations will in many
ways even be subservient to action. But if we commence
with scientific knowledge and argumentative
proof, or lay any great stress upon it as the basis of
personal Christianity, or attempt to make man moral
and religious by libraries and museums, let us in consistency
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
take chemists for our cooks, and mineralogists
for our masons.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now I wish to state all this as matter of fact, to
be judged by the candid testimony of any persons
whatever. Why we are so constituted that faith,
not knowledge or argument, is our principle of action,
is a question with which I have nothing to do; but
I think it is a fact, and, if it be such, we must
resign ourselves to it as best we may, unless we
take refuge in the intolerable paradox, that the mass
of men are created for nothing, and are meant to leave
life as they entered it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>So well has this practically been understood in all
ages of the world, that no religion yet has been a
religion of physics or of philosophy. It has ever been
synonymous with revelation. It never has been a
deduction from what we know; it has ever been an
assertion of what we are to believe. It has never lived
in a conclusion; it has ever been a message, a history,
or a vision. No legislator or priest ever dreamed of
educating our moral nature by science or by argument.
There is no difference here between true
religions and pretended. Moses was instructed not
to reason from the creation, but to work miracles.
Christianity is a history supernatural, and almost
scenic: it tells us what its Author is, by telling us
what He has done.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lord Brougham himself has recognized the force
of this principle. He has not left his philosophical
religion to argument; he has committed it to the keeping
of the imagination. Why should he depict a great
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
republic of letters, and an intellectual pantheon, but
that he feels that instances and patterns, not logical
reasonings, are the living conclusions which alone
have a hold over the affections or can form the character?</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Apprehension And Assent In The Matter Of
Religion.</head>

<p>
We are now able to determine what a dogma of faith is,
and what it is to believe it. A dogma is a proposition;
it stands for a notion or for a thing; and to believe it is
to give the assent of the mind to it, as it stands for the
one or for the other. To give a real assent to it is an act
of religion; to give a notional, is a theological act. It is
discerned, rested in, and appropriated as a reality, by the
religious imagination; it is held as a truth, by the
theological intellect.
</p>

<p>
Not as if there were in fact, or could be, any line of
demarcation or party-wall between these two modes of
assent, the religious and the theological. As intellect
is common to all men as well as imagination, every
religious man is to a certain extent a theologian, and no
theology can start or thrive without the initiative and
abiding presence of religion. As in matters of this
world, sense, sensation, instinct, intuition, supply us
with facts, and the intellect uses them; so, as regards
our relations with the Supreme Being, we get our
facts from the witness, first of nature, then of revelation,
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
and our doctrines, in which they issue, through the exercise
of abstraction and inference. This is obvious; but
it does not interfere with holding that there is a theological
habit of mind, and a religious, each distinct from
each, religion using theology, and theology using religion.
This being understood, I propose to consider the
dogmas of the Being of a God, and of the Divine Trinity
in Unity, in their relation to assent, both notional and
real, and principally to real assent;&mdash;however, I have
not yet finished all I have to say by way of introduction.
</p>

<p>
Now first, my subject is assent, and not inference. I
am not proposing to set forth the arguments which issue
in the belief of these doctrines, but to investigate what
it is to believe in them, what the mind does, what it
contemplates, when it makes an act of faith. It is true
that the same elementary facts which create an object
for an assent, also furnish matter for an inference: and
in showing what we believe, I shall unavoidably be
in a measure showing why we believe; but this is the
very reason that makes it necessary for me at the outset
to insist on the real distinction between these two concurring
and coincident courses of thought, and to premise
by way of caution, lest I should be misunderstood,
that I am not considering the question that there is a
God, but rather what God is.
</p>

<p>
And secondly, I mean by belief, not precisely faith,
because faith, in its theological sense, includes a belief,
not only in the thing believed, but also in the ground of
believing; that is, not only belief in certain doctrines,
but belief in them expressly because God has revealed
them; but here I am engaged only with what is called
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
the material object of faith, not with the formal,&mdash;with
the thing believed. The Almighty witnesses to Himself
in Revelation; we believe that He is One and that He is
Three, because He says so. We believe also what He
tells us about His Attributes, His providences and dispensations,
His determinations and acts, what He has
done and what He will do. And if all this is too much
for us, whether to bring before our minds at one time
from its variety, or even to apprehend at all or enunciate
from our narrowness of intellect or want of learning,
then at least we believe <foreign rend='italic'>in globo</foreign> all that He has
revealed to us about Himself, and that, because He has revealed
it. However, this <q>because He says it</q> does not enter
into the scope of the present inquiry, but only the truths
themselves, and these particular truths, <q>He is One,</q>
<q>He is Three;</q> and of these two, both of which are
in Revelation, I shall consider <q>He is One,</q> not as a
revealed truth, but as, what it is also, a natural truth,
the foundation of all religion. And with it I begin.
</p>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 1. Belief in One God.</head>

<p>
There is one <hi rend='smallcaps'>God</hi>, such and such in Nature and Attributes.
</p>

<p>
I say <q>such and such,</q> for, unless I explain what I
mean by <q>one God,</q> I use words which may mean any
thing or nothing. I may mean a mere <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>anima
mundi</foreign>; or
an initial principle which once was in action and now is
not; or collective humanity. I speak then of the God
of the Theist and of the Christian: a God who is numerically
One, who is Personal; the Author, Sustainer, and
Finisher of all things, the life of Law and Order, the
Moral Governor; One who is Supreme and Sole; like
Himself, unlike all things besides Himself, which all are
but His creatures; distinct from, independent of them
all; One who is self-existing, absolutely infinite, who has
ever been and ever will be, to whom nothing is past or
future; who is all perfection, and the fulness and archetype
of every possible excellence, the Truth Itself, Wisdom,
Love, Justice, Holiness; One who is All-powerful,
All-knowing, Omnipresent, Incomprehensible. These
are some of the distinctive prerogatives which I ascribe
unconditionally and unreservedly to the great Being
whom I call God.
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<p>
This being what Theists mean when they speak of
God, their assent to this truth admits without difficulty
of being what I have called a notional assent. It is an
assent following upon acts of inference, and other purely
intellectual exercises; and it is an assent to a large development
of predicates, correlative to each other, or at
least intimately connected together, drawn out as if on
paper, as we might map a country which we had never
seen, or construct mathematical tables, or master the
methods of discovery of Newton or Davy, without being
geographers, mathematicians, or chemists ourselves.
</p>

<p>
So far is clear; but the question follows, Can I attain
to any more vivid assent to the Being of a God, than
that which is given merely to notions of the intellect?
Can I enter with a personal knowledge into the circle of
truths which make up that great thought? Can I rise
to what I have called an imaginative apprehension of
it? Can I believe as if I saw? Since such a high assent
requires a present experience or memory of the fact, at
first sight it would seem as if the answer must be in the
negative; for how can I assent as if I saw, unless I have
seen? but no one in this life can see God. Yet I conceive
a real assent is possible, and I proceed to show
how.
</p>

<p>
When it is said that we cannot see God, this is undeniable;
but in what sense have we a discernment of
His creatures, of the individual beings which surround
us? The evidence which we have of their presence lies
in the phenomena which address our senses, and our
warrant for taking these for evidence is our instinctive
certitude that they are evidence. By the law of our
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
nature we associate those sensible phenomena or impressions
with certain units, individuals, substances, whatever
they are to be called, which are outside and out of the reach
of sense, and we picture them to ourselves in those phenomena.
The phenomena are as if pictures; but at the
same time they give us no exact measure or character of
the unknown things beyond them;&mdash;for who will say
there is any uniformity between the impressions which
two of us would respectively have of some third thing,
supposing one of us had only the sense of touch, and the
other only the sense of hearing? Therefore, when we
speak of our having a picture of the things which are
perceived through the senses, we mean a certain representation,
true as far as it goes, but not adequate.
</p>

<p>
And so of those intellectual and moral objects which
are brought home to us through our senses:&mdash;that they
exist, we know by instinct; that they are such and such,
we apprehend from the impressions which they leave
upon our minds. Thus the life and writings of Cicero
or Dr. Johnson, of St. Jerome or St. Chrysostom, leave
upon us certain impressions of the intellectual and moral
character of each of them, <hi rend='italic'>sui generis</hi>, and unmistakable.
We take up a passage of Chrysostom or a passage of
Jerome; there is no possibility of confusing the one with
the other; in each case we see the man in his language.
And so of any great man whom we may have known:
that he is not a mere impression on our senses, but a real
being, we know by instinct; that he is such and such,
we know by the matter or quality of that impression.
</p>

<p>
Now certainly the thought of God, as Theists entertain
it, is not gained by an instinctive association of His
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
presence with any sensible phenomena; but the office
which the senses directly fulfil as regards creation that
devolves indirectly on certain of our mental phenomena
as regards the Creator. Those phenomena are found
in the sense of moral obligation. As from a multitude
of instinctive perceptions, acting in particular instances,
of something beyond the senses, we generalize the notion
of an external world, and then picture that world in and
according to those particular phenomena from which we
started, so from the perceptive power which identifies the
intimations of conscience with the reverberations or
echoes (so to say) of an external admonition, we proceed
on to the notion of a Supreme Ruler and Judge, and
then again we image Him and His attributes in those
recurring intimations, out of which, as mental phenomena,
our recognition of His existence was originally
gained. And, if the impressions which His creatures
make on us through our senses oblige us to regard those
creatures as <hi rend='italic'>sui generis</hi> respectively, it is not wonderful
that the notices, which He indirectly gives us through
our conscience, of His own nature are such as to make us
understand that He is like Himself and like nothing
else.
</p>

<p>
I have already said I am not proposing here to prove
the Being of a God; yet I have found it impossible to
avoid saying where I look for the proof of it. For I am
looking for that proof in the same quarter as that from
which I would commence a proof of His attributes and
character,&mdash;by the same means as those by which I show
how we apprehend Him, not merely as a notion, but as
a reality. The last indeed of these three investigations
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
alone concerns me here, but I cannot altogether exclude
the two former from my consideration. However, I
repeat, what I am directly aiming at, is to explain how
we gain an image of God and give a real assent to the
proposition that He exists. And next, in order to do
this, of course I must start from some first principle;&mdash;and
that first principle, which I assume and shall not
attempt to prove, is that which I should also use as a foundation
in those other two inquiries, viz. that we have by
nature a conscience.
</p>

<p>
I assume, then, that Conscience has a legitimate place
among our mental acts; as really so, as the action of
memory, of reasoning, of imagination, or as the sense of
the beautiful; that, as there are objects which, when
presented to the mind, cause it to feel grief, regret, joy,
or desire, so there are things which excite in us approbation
or blame, and which we in consequence call right or
wrong; and which, experienced in ourselves, kindle in us
that specific sense of pleasure or pain, which goes by the
name of a good or bad conscience. This being taken for
granted, I shall attempt to show that in this special
feeling, which follows on the commission of what we call
right or wrong, lie the materials for the real apprehension
of a Divine Sovereign and Judge.
</p>

<p>
The feeling of conscience (being, I repeat, a certain
keen sensibility, pleasant or painful,&mdash;self-approval and
hope, or compunction and fear,&mdash;attendant on certain of
our actions, which in consequence we call right or
wrong) is twofold:&mdash;it is a moral sense, and a sense of
duty; a judgment of the reason and a magisterial
dictate. Of course its act is indivisible; still it has these
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
two aspects, distinct from each other, and admitting of
a separate consideration. Though I lost my sense of the
obligation which I lie under to abstain from acts of
dishonesty, I should not in consequence lose my sense
that such actions were an outrage offered to my moral
nature. Again; though I lost my sense of their moral
deformity, I should not therefore lose my sense that they
were forbidden to me. Thus conscience has both a
critical and a judicial office, and though its promptings,
in the breasts of the millions of human beings to whom
it is given, are not in all cases correct, that does not
necessarily interfere with the force of its testimony and
of its sanction: its testimony that there is a right and a
wrong, and its sanction to that testimony conveyed in
the feelings which attend on right or wrong conduct.
Here I have to speak of conscience in the latter point of
view, not as supplying us, by means of its various acts,
with the elements of morals, such as may be developed
by the intellect into an ethical code, but simply as the
dictate of an authoritative monitor bearing upon the
details of conduct as they come before us, and complete
in its several acts, one by one.
</p>

<p>
Let us then thus consider conscience, not as a rule of
right conduct, but as a sanction of right conduct. This
is its primary and most authoritative aspect; it is the
ordinary sense of the word. Half the world would be
puzzled to know what was meant by the moral sense;
but every one knows what is meant by a good or bad
conscience. Conscience is ever forcing on us by threats
and by promises that we must follow the right and
avoid the wrong; so far it is one and the same in the
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
mind of every one, whatever be its particular errors in
particular minds as to the acts which it orders to be done
or to be avoided; and in this respect it corresponds to
our perception of the beautiful and deformed. As we
have naturally a sense of the beautiful and graceful in
nature and art, though tastes proverbially differ, so we
have a sense of duty and obligation, whether we all
associate it with the same certain actions in particular
or not. Here, however, Taste and Conscience part
company: for the sense of beautifulness, as indeed the
Moral Sense, has no special relations to persons, but
contemplates objects in themselves; conscience, on the
other hand, is concerned with persons primarily, and
with actions mainly as viewed in their doers, or rather
with self alone and one's own actions, and with others
only indirectly and as if in association with self. And
further, taste is its own evidence, appealing to nothing
beyond its own sense of the beautiful or the ugly, and
enjoying the specimens of the beautiful simply for their
own sake; but conscience does not repose on itself, but
vaguely reaches forward to something beyond self, and
dimly discerns a sanction higher than self for its
decisions, as is evidenced in that keen sense of obligation
and responsibility which informs them. And hence it
is that we are accustomed to speak of conscience as a
voice,&mdash;a term which we should never think of applying
to the sense of the beautiful; and moreover a voice, or
the echo of a voice, imperative and constraining, like no
other dictate in the whole of our experience.
</p>

<p>
And again, in consequence of this prerogative of
dictating and commanding, which is of its essence,
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
Conscience has an intimate bearing on our affections and
emotions, leading us to reverence and awe, hope and
fear, especially fear, a feeling which is foreign for the
most part, not only to Taste, but even to the Moral
Sense, except in consequence of accidental associations.
No fear is felt by any one who recognizes that his
conduct has not been beautiful, though he may be
mortified at himself, if perhaps he has thereby forfeited
some advantage; but, if he has been betrayed into any
kind of immorality, he has a lively sense of responsibility
and guilt, though the act be no offence against society,&mdash;of
distress and apprehension, even though it may be
of present service to him,&mdash;of compunction and regret,
though in itself it be most pleasurable,&mdash;of confusion of
face, though it may have no witnesses. These various
perturbations of mind, which are characteristic of a bad
conscience, and may be very considerable,&mdash;self-reproach,
poignant shame, haunting remorse, chill dismay at the
prospect of the future,&mdash;and their contraries, when the
conscience is good, as real though less forcible, self-approval,
inward peace, lightness of heart, and the like,&mdash;these
emotions constitute a specific difference between
conscience and our other intellectual senses,&mdash;common
sense, good sense, sense of expedience, taste, sense of
honour, and the like,&mdash;as indeed they would also
constitute between conscience and the moral sense,
supposing these two were not aspects of one and the
same feeling, exercised upon one and the same subject-matter.
</p>

<p>
So much for the characteristic phenomena, which conscience
presents, nor is it difficult to determine what they
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
imply. I refer once more to our sense of the beautiful.
This sense is attended by an intellectual enjoyment, and
is free from whatever is of the nature of emotion, except
in one case, viz. when it is excited by personal objects;
then it is that the tranquil feeling of admiration is exchanged
for the excitement of affection and passion.
Conscience too, considered as a moral sense, an intellectual
sentiment, is a sense of admiration and disgust, of
approbation and blame: but it is something more than
a moral sense; it is always, what the sense of the beautiful
is only in certain cases; it is always emotional.
No wonder then that it always implies what that sense
only sometimes implies; that it always involves the
recognition of a living object, towards which it is
directed. Inanimate things cannot stir our affections;
these are correlative with persons. If, as is the case, we
feel responsibility, are ashamed, are frightened, at transgressing
the voice of conscience, this implies that there
is One to whom we are responsible, before whom we are
ashamed, whose claims upon us we fear. If, on doing
wrong, we feel the same tearful, broken-hearted sorrow
which overwhelms us on hurting a mother; if, on doing
right, we enjoy the same sunny serenity of mind, the
same soothing, satisfactory delight which follows on our
receiving praise from a father, we certainly have within
us the image of some person, to whom our love and veneration
look, in whose smile we find our happiness, for
whom we yearn, towards whom we direct our pleadings,
in whose anger we are troubled and waste away. These
feelings in us are such as require for their exciting cause
an intelligent being: we are not affectionate towards a
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
stone, nor do we feel shame before a horse or a dog; we
have no remorse or compunction on breaking mere human
law: yet, so it is, conscience excites all these painful
emotions, confusion, foreboding, self-condemnation; and
on the other hand it sheds upon us a deep peace, a sense
of security, a resignation, and a hope, which there is no
sensible, no earthly object to elicit. <q>The wicked flees,
when no one pursueth;</q> then why does he flee? whence
his terror? Who is it that he sees in solitude, in darkness,
in the hidden chambers of his heart? If the cause
of these emotions does not belong to this visible world,
the Object to which his perception is directed must be
Supernatural and Divine; and thus the phenomena of
Conscience, as a dictate, avail to impress the imagination
with the picture<note place='foot'>On the Formation of Images,
<hi rend='italic'>vide supr.</hi> ch. iii. 1, pp. 27, 28.</note>
of a Supreme Governor, a Judge,
holy, just, powerful, all-seeing, retributive, and is the
creative principle of religion, as the Moral Sense is the
principle of ethics.
</p>

<p>
And let me here refer again to the fact, to which I
have already drawn attention, that this instinct of the
mind recognizing an external Master in the dictate of
conscience, and imaging the thought of Him in the
definite impressions which conscience creates, is parallel
to that other law of, not only human, but of brute nature,
by which the presence of unseen individual beings is
discerned under the shifting shapes and colours of the
visible world. Is it by sense, or by reason, that brutes
understand the real unities, material and spiritual, which
are signified by the lights and shadows, the brilliant
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
ever-changing calidoscope, as it may be called, which
plays upon their <emph>retina</emph>? Not by reason, for they have
not reason; not by sense, because they are transcending
sense; therefore it is an instinct. This faculty on the
part of brutes, unless we were used to it, would strike
us as a great mystery. It is one peculiarity of animal
natures to be susceptible of phenomena through the
channels of sense; it is another to have in those sensible
phenomena a perception of the individuals to which
this or that group of them belongs. This perception of individual
things, amid the maze of shapes and colours which
meets their sight, is given to brutes in large measures,
and that, apparently from the moment of their birth. It
is by no mere physical instinct, such as that which leads
him to his mother for milk, that the new-dropped lamb
recognizes each of his fellow lambkins as a whole, consisting
of many parts bound up in one, and, before he is
an hour old, makes experience of his and their rival individualities.
And much more distinctly do the horse and
dog recognize even the personality of their masters.
How are we to explain this apprehension of things,
which are one and individual, in the midst of a world of
pluralities and transmutations, whether in the instance
of brutes or again of children? But until we account
for the knowledge which an infant has of his mother or
his nurse, what reason have we to take exception at the
doctrine, as strange and difficult, that in the dictate of
conscience, without previous experiences or analogical
reasoning, he is able gradually to perceive the voice, or
the echoes of the voice, of a Master, living, personal,
and sovereign?
</p>

<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<p>
I grant, of course, that we cannot assign a date, ever
so early, before which he had learned nothing at all,
and formed no mental associations, from the words and
conduct of those who have the care of him. But still,
if a child of five or six years old, when reason is at length
fully awake, has already mastered and appropriated
thoughts and beliefs, in consequence of their teaching,
in such sort as to be able to handle and apply them
familiarly, according to the occasion, as principles of
intellectual action, those beliefs at the very least must
be singularly congenial to his mind, if not connatural
with its initial action. And that such a spontaneous
reception of religious truths is common with children, I
shall take for granted, till I am convinced that I am
wrong in so doing. The child keenly understands that
there is a difference between right and wrong; and when
he has done what he believes to be wrong, he is conscious
that he is offending One to whom he is amenable,
whom he does not see, who sees him. His mind reaches
forward with a strong presentiment to the thought of
a Moral Governor, sovereign over him, mindful, and
just. It comes to him like an impulse of nature to
entertain it.
</p>

<p>
It is my wish to take an ordinary child, but still one
who is safe from influences destructive of his religious
instincts. Supposing he has offended his parents, he
will all alone and without effort, as if it were the most
natural of acts, place himself in the presence of God, and
beg of Him to set him right with them. Let us consider
how much is contained in this simple act. First,
it involves the impression on his mind of an unseen
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
Being with whom he is in immediate relation, and that
relation so familiar that he can address Him whenever
he himself chooses; next, of One whose goodwill towards
him he is assured of, and can take for granted&mdash;nay,
who loves him better, and is nearer to him, than
his parents; further, of One who can hear him, wherever
he happens to be, and who can read his thoughts, for
his prayer need not be vocal; lastly, of One who can
effect a critical change in the state of feeling of others
towards him. That is, we shall not be wrong in holding
that this child has in his mind the image of an
Invisible Being, who exercises a particular providence
among us, who is present every where, who is heart-reading,
heart-changing, ever-accessible, open to impetration.
What a strong and intimate vision of God
must he have already attained, if, as I have supposed, an
ordinary trouble of mind has the spontaneous effect of
leading him for consolation and aid to an Invisible Personal
Power!
</p>

<p>
Moreover, this image brought before his mental vision
is the image of One who by implicit threat and promise
commands certain things which he, the same child, coincidently,
by the same act of his mind, approves; which
receive the adhesion of his moral sense and judgment, as
right and good. It is the image of One who is good,
inasmuch as enjoining and enforcing what is right and
good, and who, in consequence, not only excites in the
child hope and fear,&mdash;nay (it may be added), gratitude
towards Him, as giving a law and maintaining it by
reward and punishment,&mdash;but kindles in him love towards
Him, as giving him a good law, and therefore as
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
being good Himself, for it is the property of goodness to
kindle love, or rather the very object of love is goodness;
and all those distinct elements of the moral law, which
the typical child, whom I am supposing, more or less
consciously loves and approves,&mdash;truth, purity, justice,
kindness, and the like,&mdash;are but shapes and aspects of
goodness. And having in his degree a sensibility towards
them all, for the sake of them all he is moved to
love the Lawgiver, who enjoins them upon him. And,
as he can contemplate these qualities and their manifestations
under the common name of goodness, he is
prepared to think of them as indivisible, correlative,
supplementary of each other in one and the same Personality,
so that there is no aspect of goodness which God
is not; and that the more, because the notion of a perfection
embracing all possible excellences, both moral
and intellectual, is especially congenial to the mind, and
there are in fact intellectual attributes, as well as moral,
included in the child's image of God, as above represented.
</p>

<p>
Such is the apprehension which even a child may have
of his Sovereign Lawgiver and Judge; which is possible
in the case of children, because, at least, some
children possess it, whether others possess it or no; and
which, when it is found in children, is found to act
promptly and keenly, by reason of the paucity of their
ideas. It is an image of the good God, good in Himself,
good relatively to the child, with whatever incompleteness;
an image before it has been reflected on, and
before it is recognized by him as a notion. Though he
cannot explain or define the word <q>God,</q> when told to
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
use it, his acts show that to him it is far more than
a word. He listens, indeed, with wonder and interest
to fables or tales; he has a dim, shadowy sense of
what he hears about persons and matters of this world;
but he has that within him which actually vibrates,
responds, and gives a deep meaning to the lessons
of his first teachers about the will and the providence of
God.
</p>

<p>
How far this initial religious knowledge comes from
without, and how far from within, how much is
natural, how much implies a special divine aid which is
above nature, we have no means of determining, nor is
it necessary for my present purpose to determine. I am
not engaged in tracing the image of God in the mind of a
child or a man to its first origins, but showing that he can
become possessed of such an image, over and above all
mere notions of God, and in what that image consists.
Whether its elements, latent in the mind, would ever
be elicited without extrinsic help is very doubtful; but
whatever be the actual history of the first formation of
the divine image within us, so far at least is certain,
that, by informations external to ourselves, as time goes
on, it admits of being strengthened and improved. It is
certain too, that, whether it grows brighter and stronger,
or, on the other hand, is dimmed, distorted, or obliterated,
depends on each of us individually, and on his
circumstances. It is more than probable that, in the
event, from neglect, from the temptations of life, from
bad companions, or from the urgency of secular occupations,
the light of the soul will fade away and die out.
Men transgress their sense of duty, and gradually lose
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
those sentiments of shame and fear, the natural supplements
of transgression, which, as I have said, are the
witnesses of the Unseen Judge. And, even were it
deemed impossible that those who had in their first
youth a genuine apprehension of Him, could ever utterly
lose it, yet that apprehension may become almost
undistinguishable from an inferential acceptance of
the great truth, or may dwindle into a mere notion
of their intellect. On the contrary, the image of
God, if duly cherished, may expand, deepen, and be
completed, with the growth of their powers and in
the course of life, under the varied lessons, within
and without them, which are brought home to them
concerning that same God, One and Personal, by
means of education, social intercourse, experience, and
literature.
</p>

<p>
To a mind thus carefully formed upon the basis of its
natural conscience, the world, both of nature and of man,
does but give back a reflection of those truths about the
One Living God, which have been familiar to it from
childhood. Good and evil meet us daily as we pass
through life, and there are those who think it philosophical
to act towards the manifestations of each with
some sort of impartiality, as if evil had as much right to
be there as good, or even a better, as having more
striking triumphs and a broader jurisdiction. And
because the course of things is determined by fixed laws,
they consider that those laws preclude the present
agency of the Creator in the carrying out of particular
issues. It is otherwise with the theology of a religious
imagination. It has a living hold on truths which are
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
really to be found in the world, though they are not upon
the surface. It is able to pronounce by anticipation,
what it takes a long argument to prove&mdash;that good is
the rule, and evil the exception. It is able to assume
that, uniform as are the laws of nature, they are consistent
with a particular Providence. It interprets what it
sees around it by this previous inward teaching, as the
true key of that maze of vast complicated disorder; and
thus it gains a more and more consistent and luminous
vision of God from the most unpromising materials.
Thus conscience is a connecting principle between the
creature and his Creator; and the firmest hold of theological
truths is gained by habits of personal religion.
When men begin all their works with the thought of
God, acting for His sake and to fulfil His will, when
they ask His blessing on themselves and their life, pray
to Him for the objects they desire, and see Him in the
event, whether it be according to their prayers or not,
they will find every thing that happens tend to confirm
them in the truth about Him which live in their imagination,
varied and unearthly as those truths may be.
Then they are brought into His presence as that of a
Living Person, and are able to hold converse with Him,
and that with a directness and simplicity, with a confidence
and intimacy, <hi rend='italic'>mutatis mutandis</hi>, which we use
towards an earthly superior; so that it is doubtful
whether we realize the company of our fellow-men with
greater keenness than these favoured minds are able to
contemplate and adore the Unseen, Incomprehensible
Creator.
</p>

<p>
This vivid apprehension of religious objects, on which
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
I have been enlarging, is independent of the written
records of Revelation; it does not require any knowledge
of Scripture, nor of the history or the teaching of the
Catholic Church. It is independent of books. But if so
much may be traced out in the twilight of Natural
Religion, it is obvious how great an addition in fulness
and exactness is made to our mental image of the
Divine Personality and Attributes, by the light of
Christianity. And, indeed, to give us a clear and
sufficient object for our faith, is one main purpose of
the supernatural Dispensations of Religion. This purpose
is carried out in the written Word, with an effectiveness
which inspiration alone could secure, first, by the
histories which form so large a portion of the Old Testament;
and scarcely less impressively in the prophetical
system, as it is gradually unfolded and perfected in the
writings of those who were its ministers and spokesmen.
And as the exercise of the affections strengthens our
apprehension of the object of them, it is impossible to
exaggerate the influence exerted on the religious imagination
by a book of devotions so sublime, so penetrating,
so full of deep instruction as the Psalter, to say nothing
of other portions of the Hagiographa. And then as
regards the New Testament, the Gospels, from their
subject, contain a manifestation of the Divine Nature,
so special, as to make it appear from the contrast as
if nothing were known of God, when they are unknown.
Lastly, the Apostolic Epistles, the long history of the
Church, with its fresh exhibitions of Divine
Agency, the Lives of the Saints, and the reasonings,
internal collisions, and decisions of the Theological School,
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
form an extended comment on the words and works
of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
I think I need not say more in illustration of the
subject which I proposed for consideration in this Section.
I have wished to trace the process by which the mind
arrives, not only at a notional, but at an imaginative or
real assent to the doctrine that there is One God, that
is, an assent made with an apprehension, not only of
what the words of the proposition mean, but of the
object denoted by them. Without a proposition or
thesis there can be no assent, no belief, at all; any more
than there can be an inference without a conclusion.
The proposition that there is One Personal and Present
God may be held in either way; either as a theological
truth, or as a religious fact or reality. The notion and
the reality assented-to are represented by one and the
same proposition, but serve as distinct interpretations of
it. When the proposition is apprehended for the purposes
of proof, analysis, comparison, and the like intellectual
exercises, it is used as the expression of a notion; when
for the purposes of devotion, it is the image of a reality.
Theology, properly and directly, deals with notional
apprehension; religion with imaginative.
</p>

<p>
Here we have the solution of the common mistake of
supposing that there is a contrariety and antagonism
between a dogmatic creed and vital religion. People
urge that salvation consists, not in believing the propositions
that there is a God, that there is a Saviour,
that our Lord is God, that there is a Trinity, but in
believing in God, in a Saviour, in a Sanctifier; and
they object that such propositions are but a formal and
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
human medium destroying all true reception of the
Gospel, and making religion a matter of words or of
logic, instead of its having its seat in the heart. They
are right so far as this, that men can and sometimes do
rest in the propositions themselves as expressing intellectual
notions; they are wrong, when they maintain
that men need do so or always do so. The propositions
may and must be used, and can easily be used, as the
expression of facts, not notions, and they are necessary
to the mind in the same way that language is ever
necessary for denoting facts, both for ourselves as
individuals, and for our intercourse with others. Again,
they are useful in their dogmatic aspect as ascertaining
and making clear for us the truths on which the
religious imagination has to rest. Knowledge must
ever precede the exercise of the affections. We feel
gratitude and love, we feel indignation and dislike, when
we have the informations actually put before us which
are to kindle those several emotions. We love our
parents, as our parents, when we know them to be our
parents; we must know concerning God, before we can
feel love, fear, hope, or trust towards Him. Devotion
must have its objects; those objects, as being supernatural,
when not represented to our senses by material
symbols, must be set before the mind in propositions.
The formula, which embodies a dogma for the theologian,
readily suggests an object for the worshipper. It seems
a truism to say, yet it is all that I have been saying,
that in religion the imagination and affections should
always be under the control of reason. Theology may
stand as a substantive science, though it be without the
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
life of religion; but religion cannot maintain its ground
at all without theology. Sentiment, whether imaginative
or emotional, falls back upon the intellect for its stay,
when sense cannot be called into exercise; and it is in
this way that devotion falls back upon dogma.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 2. Belief in the Holy Trinity.</head>

<p>
Of course I cannot hope to carry all inquiring minds
with me in what I have been laying down in the foregoing
Section. I have appealed to the testimony given
implicitly by our conscience to the Divine Being and
His Attributes, and there are those, I know, whose
experience will not respond to the appeal:&mdash;doubtless;
but are there any truths which have reality, whether of
experience or of reason, which are not disputed by some
schools of philosophy or some bodies of men? If we
assume nothing but what has universal reception, the
field of our possible discussions will suffer much contraction;
so that it must be considered sufficient in any
inquiry, if the principles or facts assumed have a large
following. This condition is abundantly fulfilled as
regards the authority and religious meaning of conscience;&mdash;that
conscience is the voice of God has almost
grown into a proverb. This solemn dogma is recognized
as such by the great mass both of the young and of
the uneducated, by the religious few and the irreligious
many. It is proclaimed in the history and literature of
nations; it has had supporters in all ages, places, creeds,
forms of social life, professions, and classes. It has held
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
its ground under great intellectual and moral disadvantages;
it has recovered its supremacy, and ultimately
triumphed in the minds of those who had rebelled
against it. Even philosophers, who have been antagonists
on other points, agree in recognizing the inward
voice of that solemn Monitor, personal, peremptory,
unargumentative, irresponsible, minatory, definitive.
This I consider relieves me of the necessity of arguing
with those who would resolve our sense of right and
wrong into a sense of the Expedient or the Beautiful, or
would refer its authoritative suggestions to the effect of
teaching or of association. There are those who can see
and hear for all the common purposes of life, yet have no
eye for colours or their shades, or no ear for music;
moreover, there are degrees of sensibility to colours and
to sounds, in the comparison of man with man, while
some men are stone-blind or stone-deaf. Again, all men,
as time goes on, have the prospect of losing that keenness
of sight and hearing which they possessed in their
youth; and so, in like manner, we may lose in manhood
and in age that sense of a Supreme Teacher and Judge
which was the gift of our first years; and that the more,
because in most men the imagination suffers from the
lapse of time and the experience of life, long before the
bodily senses fail. And this accords with the advice of
the sacred writer to <q>remember our Creator in the days
of our youth,</q> while our moral sensibilities are fresh,
<q>before the sun and the light and the moon and the
stars be darkened, and the clouds return after the rain.</q>
Accordingly, if there be those who deny that the dictate
of conscience is ever more than a taste, or an association,
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
it is a less difficulty to me to believe that they are deficient
either in the religious sense or in their memory of
early years, than that they never had at all what those
around them without hesitation profess to have received
from nature.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
So much on the doctrine of the Being and Attributes
of God, and of the real apprehension with which we can
contemplate and assent to it:&mdash;now I turn to the doctrine
of the Holy Trinity, with the purpose of investigating
in like manner how far it belongs to theology,
how far to the faith and devotion of the individual; how
far the propositions enunciating it are confined to the
expression of intellectual notions, and how far they
stand for things also, and admit of that assent which we
give to objects presented to us by the imagination.
And first I have to state what our doctrine is.
</p>

<p>
No one is to be called a Theist, who does not believe
in a Personal God, whatever difficulty there may be in
defining the word <q>Personal.</q> Now it is the belief of
Catholics about the Supreme Being, that this essential
characteristic of His Nature is reiterated in three distinct
ways or modes; so that the Almighty God, instead of
being One Person only, which is the teaching of Natural
Religion, has Three Personalities, and is at once, according
as we view Him in the one or the other of them, the
Father, the Son, and the Spirit&mdash;a Divine Three, who
bear towards Each Other the several relations which those
names indicate, and are in that respect distinct from Each
Other, and in that alone.
</p>

<p>
This is the teaching of the Athanasian Creed; viz.
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
that the One Personal God, who is not a logical or physical
unity, but a Living <foreign rend='italic'>Monas</foreign>, more really one even
than an individual man is one&mdash;He (<q>unus,</q> not
<q>unum,</q> because of the inseparability of His Nature and
Personality),&mdash;He at once is Father, is Son, is Holy
Ghost, Each of whom is that One Personal God in the
fulness of His Being and Attributes; so that the Father
is all that is meant by the word <q>God,</q> as if we knew
nothing of Son, or of Spirit; and in like manner the
Son and the Spirit are Each by Himself all that is
meant by the word, as if the Other Two were unknown;
moreover, that by the word <q>God</q> is meant
nothing over and above what is meant by the <q>Father,</q>
or by <q>the Son,</q> or by <q>the Holy Ghost;</q> and that
the Father is in no sense the Son, nor the Son the
Holy Ghost, nor the Holy Ghost the Father. Such is
the prerogative of the Divine Infinitude, that that One
and Single Personal Being, the Almighty God, is really
Three, while He is absolutely One.
</p>

<p>
Indeed, the Catholic dogma may be said to be summed
up in this very formula on which St. Augustine lays so
much stress, <q>Tres et Unus,</q> not merely <q>Unum;</q> hence
that formula is the key-note, as it may be called, of the
Athanasian Creed. In that Creed we testify to the
Unus Increatus, to the Unus Immensus, Omnipotens,
Deus, and Dominus; yet Each of the Three also is by
Himself Increatus, Immensus, Omnipotens, for Each is
that One God, though Each is not the Other; Each, as
is intimated by Unus Increatus, is the One Personal God
of Natural Religion.
</p>

<p>
That this doctrine, thus drawn out, is of a notional
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
character, is plain; the question before me is whether in
any sense it can become the object of real apprehension,
that is, whether any portion of it may be considered as
addressed to the imagination, and is able to exert that
living mastery over the mind, which is instanced as I
have shown above, as regards the proposition, <q>There is
a God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There is a God,</q> when really apprehended, is the
object of a strong energetic adhesion, which works a
revolution in the mind; but when held merely as a
notion, it requires but a cold and ineffective acceptance,
though it be held ever so unconditionally. Such in its
character is the assent of thousands, whose imaginations
are not at all kindled, nor their hearts inflamed, nor
their conduct affected, by the most august of all conceivable
truths. I ask, then, as concerns the doctrine of
the Holy Trinity, such as I have drawn it out to be, is it
capable of being apprehended otherwise than notionally?
Is it a theory, undeniable indeed, but addressed to the
student, and to no one else? Is it the elaborate, subtle,
triumphant exhibition of a truth, completely developed,
and happily adjusted, and accurately balanced on its
centre, and impregnable on every side, as a scientific
view, <q>totus, teres, atque rotundus,</q> challenging all
assailants, or, on the other hand, does it come to the
unlearned, the young, the busy, and the afflicted, as a
fact which is to arrest them, penetrate them, and to support
and animate them in their passage through life?
That is, does it admit of being held in the imagination,
and being embraced with a real assent? I maintain it
does, and that it is the normal faith which every Christian
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
has, on which he is stayed, which is his spiritual life,
there being nothing in the exposition of the dogma, as
I have given it above, which does not address the imagination,
as well as the intellect.
</p>

<p>
Now let us observe what is not in that exposition;&mdash;there
are no scientific terms in it. I will not allow that
<q>Personal</q> is such, because it is a word in common use,
and though it cannot mean precisely the same when
used of God as when it is used of man, yet it is
sufficiently explained by that common use, to allow of
its being intelligibly applied to the Divine Nature.
The other words, which occur in the above account of
the doctrine,&mdash;Three, One, He, God, Father, Son, Spirit,&mdash;are
none of them words peculiar to theology, have
all a popular meaning, and are used according to that
obvious and popular meaning, when introduced into the
Catholic dogma. No human words indeed are worthy
of the Supreme Being, none are adequate; but we have
no other words to use but human, and those in question
are among the simplest and most intelligible that are to
be found in language.
</p>

<p>
There are then no terms in the foregoing exposition
which do not admit of a plain sense, and they are there
used in that sense; and, moreover, that sense is what I
have called real, for the words in their ordinary use stand
for things. The words, Father, Son, Spirit, He, One,
and the rest, are not abstract terms, but concrete, and
adapted to excite images. And these words thus simple
and clear, are embodied in simple, clear, brief, categorical
propositions. There is nothing abstruse either in the
terms themselves, or in their setting. It is otherwise
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
of course with formal theological treatises on the subject
of the dogma. There we find such words as substance,
essence, existence, form, subsistence, notion, circumincession;
and, though these are far easier to understand than
might at first sight be thought, still they are doubtless
addressed to the intellect, and can only command a
notional assent.
</p>

<p>
It will be observed also that not even the words
<q>mysteriousness</q> and <q>mystery</q> occur in the exposition
which I have above given of the doctrine; I
omitted them, because they are not parts of the Divine
Verity as such, but in relation to creatures and to the
human intellect; and because they are of a notional
character. It is plain of course even at first sight that
the doctrine is an inscrutable mystery, or has an inscrutable
mysteriousness; few minds indeed but have
theology enough to see this; and if an educated man, to
whom it is presented, does not perceive that mysteriousness
at once, that is a sure token that he does not
rightly apprehend the propositions which contain the
doctrine. Hence it follows that the thesis <q>the doctrine
of the Holy Trinity in Unity is mysterious</q> is indirectly
an article of faith. But such an article, being a reflection
made upon a revealed truth in an inference, expresses
a notion, not a thing. It does not relate to the
direct apprehension of the object, but to a judgment of
our reason upon the object. Accordingly the mysteriousness
of the doctrine is not, strictly speaking,
intrinsical to it, as it is proposed to the religious apprehension,
though in matter of fact a devotional mind, on
perceiving that mysteriousness, will lovingly appropriate
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
it, as involved in the divine revelation; and, as such a
mind turns all thoughts which come before it to a sacred
use, so will it dwell upon the Mystery of the Trinity
with awe and veneration, as a truth befitting, so to say,
the Immensity and Incomprehensibility of the Supreme
Being.
</p>

<p>
However, I do not put forward the mystery as the
direct object of real or religious apprehension; nor
again, the complex doctrine (when it is viewed, <hi rend='italic'>per
modum unius</hi>, as one whole), in which the mystery lies.
Let it be observed, it is possible for the mind to hold a
number of propositions either in their combination as one
whole, or one by one; one by one, with an intelligent
perception indeed of each, and of the general direction of
each towards the rest, yet of each separately from the
rest, for its own sake only, and not in connexion
and one with the rest. Thus I may know London
quite well, and find my way from street to street in any
part of it without difficulty, yet be quite unable to draw
a map of it. Comparison, calculation, cataloguing,
arranging, classifying, are intellectual acts subsequent
upon, and not necessary for, a real apprehension of the
things on which they are exercised. Strictly speaking
then, the dogma of the Holy Trinity, as a complex
whole, or as a mystery, is not the formal object of
religious apprehension and assent; but as a number of
propositions, taken one by one. That mystery also is of
course the object of assent, but it is the notional object;
and when presented to religious minds, it is received by
them notionally; and again implicitly, viz. in the real
assent which they give to the word of God as conveyed
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
to them through the instrumentality of His Church.
On these points it may be right to enlarge.
</p>

<p>
Of course, as I have been saying, a man of ordinary
intelligence will be at once struck with the apparent
contrariety between the propositions one with another
which constitute the Heavenly Dogma, and, by reason
of his spontaneous activity of mind and by an habitual
association, he will be compelled to view the Dogma in
the light of that contrariety,&mdash;so much so, that to hold
one and all of these separate propositions will be to such
a man all one with holding the mystery, as a mystery;
and in consequence he will so hold it;&mdash;but still, I say,
so far he will hold it only with a notional apprehension.
He will accurately take in the meaning of each of the
dogmatic propositions in its relation to the rest of them,
combining them into one whole and embracing what he
cannot realize, with an assent, notional indeed, but as
genuine and thorough as any real assent can be. But
the question is whether a real assent to the mystery, as
such, is possible; and I say it is not possible, because,
while we can image the separate propositions, we cannot
image them all together. We cannot, because the
mystery transcends all our experience; we have no
experiences in our memory which we can put together,
compare, contrast, unite, and thereby transmute into an
image of the Ineffable Verity;&mdash;certainly; but what is
in some degree a matter of experience, what is presented
for the imagination, the affections, the devotion, the
spiritual life of the Christian to repose upon with a real
assent, what stands for things, not for notions only, is
each of those propositions taken one by one, and that, not
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
in the case of intellectual and thoughtful minds only, but
of all religious minds whatever, in the case of a child or
a peasant, as well as of a philosopher.
</p>

<p>
This is only one instance of a general principle which
holds good in all such real apprehension as is possible to
us, of God and His Attributes. Not only do we see
Him at best only in shadows, but we cannot bring even
those shadows together, for they flit to and fro, and are
never present to us at once. We can indeed combine
the various matters which we know of Him by an act of
the intellect, and treat them theologically, but such
theological combinations are no objects for the imagination
to gaze upon. Our image of Him never is one,
but broken into numberless partial aspects, independent
each of each. As we cannot see the whole starry
firmament at once, but have to turn ourselves from east
to west, and then round to east again, sighting first one
constellation and then another, and losing these in order
to gain those, so it is, and much more, with such real
apprehensions as we can secure of the Divine Nature.
We know one truth about Him and another truth,&mdash;but
we cannot image both of them together; we cannot
bring them before us by one act of the mind; we drop
the one while we turn to take up the other. None of
them are fully dwelt on and enjoyed, when they are
viewed in combination. Moreover, our devotion is tried
and confused by the long list of propositions which theology
is obliged to draw up, by the limitations, explanations,
definitions, adjustments, balancings, cautions,
arbitrary prohibitions, which are imperatively required
by the weakness of human thought and the imperfections
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
of human language. Such exercises of reasoning indeed
do but increase and harmonize our notional apprehension
of the dogma, but they add little to the luminousness
and vital force with which its separate propositions come
home to our imagination, and if they are necessary, as
they certainly are, they are necessary not so much for
faith, as against unbelief.
</p>

<p>
Break a ray of light into its constituent colours, each
is beautiful, each may be enjoyed; attempt to unite
them, and perhaps you produce only a dirty white. The
pure and indivisible Light is seen only by the blessed
inhabitants of heaven; here we have but such faint
reflections of it as its diffraction supplies; but they are
sufficient for faith and devotion. Attempt to combine
them into one, and you gain nothing but a mystery,
which you can describe as a notion, but cannot depict as
an imagination. And this, which holds of the Divine
Attributes, holds also of the Holy Trinity in Unity.
And hence, perhaps, it is that the latter doctrine is never
spoken of as a Mystery in the New Testament, which is
addressed far more to the imagination and affections than
to the intellect. Hence, too, what is more remarkable,
the dogma is not called a mystery in the Creeds; not in
the Apostles' nor the Nicene, nor even in the Athanasian.
The reason seems to be, that the Creeds have a place in
the Ritual; they are devotional acts, and of the nature
of prayers, addressed to God; and, in such addresses, to
speak of intellectual difficulties would be out of place.
It must be recollected especially that the Athanasian
Creed has sometimes been called the <q>Psalmus <hi rend='italic'>Quicunque</hi>.</q>
It is not a mere collection of notions, however
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
momentous. It is a psalm or hymn of praise, of
confession, and of profound, self-prostrating homage,
parallel to the canticles of the elect in the Apocalypse.
It appeals to the imagination quite as much as to the
intellect. It is the war-song of faith, with which we
warn first ourselves, then each other, and then all those
who are within its hearing, and the hearing of the
Truth, who our God is, and how we must worship Him,
and how vast our responsibility will be, if we know what
to believe, and yet believe not. It is
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The Psalm that gathers in one glorious lay</q></l>
<l>All chants that e'er from heaven to earth found way;</l>
<l>Creed of the Saints, and Anthem of the Blest,</l>
<l>And calm-breathed warning of the kindliest love</l>
<l><q rend='post'>That ever heaved a wakeful mother's breast.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
For myself, I have ever felt it as the most simple and
sublime, the most devotional formulary to which Christianity
has given birth, more so even than the <hi rend='italic'>Veni
Creator</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Te Deum</hi>. Even the antithetical form
of its sentences, which is a stumbling-block to so many,
as seeming to force, and to exult in forcing a mystery
upon recalcitrating minds, has to my apprehension, even
notionally considered, a very different drift. It is
intended as a check upon our reasonings, lest they rush
on in one direction beyond the limits of the truth, and it
turns them back into the opposite direction. Certainly
it implies a glorying in the Mystery; but it is not
simply a statement of the Mystery for the sake of its
mysteriousness.
</p>

<p>
What is more remarkable still, a like silence as to the
mysteriousness of the doctrine is observed in the successive
definitions of the Church concerning it. Confession
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
after confession, canon after canon is drawn up in the
course of centuries; Popes and Councils have found it
their duty to insist afresh upon the dogma; they have
enunciated it in new or additional propositions; but not
even in their most elaborate formularies do they use the
word <q>mystery,</q> as far as I know. The great Council
of Toledo pursues the scientific ramifications of the
doctrine, with the exact diligence of theology, at a length
four times that of the Athanasian Creed; the fourth
Lateran completes, by a final enunciation, the development
of the sacred doctrine after the mind of St.
Augustine; the Creed of Pope Pius IV. prescribes the
general rule of faith against the heresies of these latter
times; but in none of them do we find either the word
<q>mystery,</q> or any suggestion of mysteriousness.
</p>

<p>
Such is the usage of the Church in its dogmatic
statements concerning the Holy Trinity, as if fulfilling
the maxim, <q>Lex orandi, lex credendi.</q> I suppose it is
founded on a tradition, because the custom is otherwise
as regards catechisms and theological treatises. These
belong to particular ages and places, and are addressed
to the intellect. In them, certainly, the mysteriousness
of the doctrine is almost uniformly insisted on. But,
however this contrast of usage is to be explained, the
Creeds are enough to show that the dogma may be
taught in its fulness for the purposes of popular faith and
devotion without directly insisting on that mysteriousness,
which is necessarily involved in the combined
view of its separate propositions. That systematized
whole is the object of notional assent, and its propositions,
one by one, are the objects of real.
</p>

<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>

<p>
To show this in fact, I will enumerate the separate
propositions of which the dogma consists. They are
nine, and stand as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. There are Three who give testimony in heaven, the
Father, the Word or Son, and the Holy Spirit. 2. From
the Father is, and ever has been, the Son. 3. From the
Father and Son is, and ever has been, the Spirit.
</p>

<p>
4. The Father is the One Eternal Personal God.
5. The Son is the One Eternal Personal God. 6. The
Spirit is the One Eternal Personal God.
</p>

<p>
7. The Father is not the Son. 8. The Son is not the
Holy Ghost. 9. The Holy Ghost is not the Father.
</p>

<p>
Now I think it is a fact, that, whereas these nine
propositions contain the Mystery, yet, taken, not as a
whole, but separately, each by itself, they are not only
apprehensible, but admit of a real apprehension.
</p>

<p>
Thus, for instance, if the proposition <q>There is One
who bears witness of Himself,</q> or <q>reveals Himself,</q>
would admit of a real assent, why does not also the proposition
<q>There are Three who bear witness</q>?
</p>

<p>
Again, if the word <q>God</q> may create an image in
our minds, why may not the proposition <q>The Father is
God</q>? or again, <q>The Son,</q> or <q>The Holy Ghost is
God</q>?
</p>

<p>
Again, to say that <q>the Son is other than the Holy
Ghost,</q> or <q>neither Son nor Holy Ghost is the Father,</q>
is not a simple negative, but also a declaration that
Each of the Divine Three by Himself is complete in
Himself, and simply and absolutely God as though the
Other Two were not revealed to us.
</p>

<p>
Again, from our experience of the works of man, we
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
accept with a real apprehension the proposition <q>The
Angels are made by God,</q> correcting the word <q>made,</q>
as is required in the case of a creating Power, and a
spiritual work:&mdash;why may we not in like matter refine
and elevate the human analogy, yet keep the image,
when a Divine Birth is set before us in terms which
properly belong to what is human and earthly? If our
experience enables us to apprehend the essential fact of
sonship, as being a communication of being and of
nature from one to another, why should we not thereby
in a certain measure realize the proposition <q>The Word
is the Son of God</q>?
</p>

<p>
Again, we have abundant instances in nature of the
general law of one thing coming from another or from
others:&mdash;as the child issues in the man as his successor,
and the child and the man issue in the old man, like
them both, but not the same, so different as almost to
have a fresh personality distinct from each, so we may
form some image, however vague, of the procession of
the Holy Spirit from Father and Son. This is what I
should say of the propositions which I have numbered
two and three, which are the least susceptible of a real
assent out of the nine.
</p>

<p>
So much at first sight; but the force of what I have
been saying will be best understood, by considering
what Scripture and the Ritual of the Church witness in
accordance with it. In referring to these two great
store-houses of faith and devotion, I must premise, as
when I spoke of the Being of a God, that I am not
proving by means of them the dogma of the Holy
Trinity, but using the one and the other in illustration
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
of the action of the separate articles of that dogma upon
the imagination, though the complex truth, in which,
when combined, they issue, is not in sympathy or
correspondence with it, but altogether beyond it; and
next of the action and influence of those separate articles,
by means of the imagination, upon the affections and
obedience of Christians, high and low.
</p>

<p>
This being understood, I ask what chapter of St.
John or St. Paul is not full of the Three Divine Names,
introduced in one or other of the above nine propositions,
expressed or implied, or in their parallels, or in
parts or equivalents of them? What lesson is there
given us by these two chief writers of the New Testament,
which does not grow out of Their Persons and
Their Offices? At one time we read of the grace of the
Second Person, the love of the First, and the communication
of the Third; at another we are told by the Son,
<q>I will pray the Father, and He will send you another
Paraclete;</q> and then, <q>All that the Father hath are
Mine; the Paraclete shall receive of Mine.</q> Then
again we read of <q>the foreknowledge of the Father, the
sanctification of the Spirit, the Blood of Jesus Christ;</q>
and again we are to <q>pray in the Holy Ghost, abide in
the love of God, and look for the mercy of Jesus.</q>
And so, in like manner, to Each, in one passage or
another, are ascribed the same titles and works: Each is
acknowledged as Lord; Each is eternal; Each is Truth;
Each is Holiness; Each is all in all; Each is Creator;
Each wills with a Supreme Will; Each is the Author of
the new birth; Each speaks in His ministers; Each is
the Revealer; Each is the Lawgiver; Each is the Teacher
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
of the elect; in Each the elect have fellowship; Each
leads them on; Each raises them from the dead. What
is all this, but <q>the Father Eternal, the Son Eternal,
and the Holy Ghost Eternal; the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost Omnipotent; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
God,</q> of the Athanasian Creed? And if the New Testament
be, as it confessedly is, so real in its teaching, so
luminous, so impressive, so constraining, so full of
images, so sparing in mere notions, whence is this but
because, in its references to the Object of our supreme
worship, it is ever ringing the changes (so to say) on the
nine propositions which I have set down, and on the
particular statements into which they may be severally
resolved?
</p>

<p>
Take one of them, as an instance, viz. the dogmatic
sentence <q>The Son is God.</q> What an illustration of
the real assent which can be given to this proposition,
and its power over our affections and emotions, is the
first half of the first chapter of St. John's gospel! or
again the vision of our Lord in the first chapter of the
Apocalypse! or the first chapter of St. John's first
Epistle! Again, how burning are St. Paul's words
when he speaks of our Lord's crucifixion and death!
what is the secret of that flame, but this same dogmatic
sentence, <q>The Son is God</q>? why should the death of
the Son be more awful than any other death, except
that He, though man, was God? And so, again, all
through the Old Testament, what is it which gives an
interpretation and a persuasive power to so many
passages and portions, especially of the Psalms and the
Prophets, but this same theological formula, <q>The
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
Messias is God,</q> a proposition which never could thus
vivify in the religious mind the letter of the sacred
text, unless it appealed to the imagination, and could be
held with a much stronger assent than any that is
merely notional.
</p>

<p>
This same power of the dogma may be illustrated
from the Ritual. Consider the services for Christmas or
Epiphany; for Easter, Ascension, and (I may say) pre-eminently
Corpus Christi; what are these great Festivals
but comments on the words, <q>The Son is God</q>?
Yet who will say that they have the subtlety, the aridity,
the coldness of mere scholastic science? Are they
addressed to the pure intellect, or to the imagination?
do they interest our logical faculty, or excite our devotion?
Why is it that personally we often find ourselves
so ill-fitted to take part in them, except that we are not
good enough, that in our case the dogma is far too much
a theological notion, far too little an image living within
us? And so again, as to the Divinity of the Holy Ghost:
consider the breviary offices for Pentecost and its Octave,
the grandest perhaps in the whole year; are they created
out of mere abstractions and inferences, or has not the
categorical proposition of St. Athanasius, <q>The Holy
Ghost is God,</q> such a place in the imagination and the
heart, as suffices to give birth to the noble Hymns,
<hi rend='italic'>Veni Creator</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Veni Sancte Spiritus</hi>?
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I sum up then to the same effect as in the preceding
Section. Religion has to do with the real, and the real
is the particular; theology has to do with what is
notional, and the notional is the general and systematic.
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
Hence theology has to do with the dogma of the Holy
Trinity as a whole made up of many propositions; but
Religion has to do with each of those separate propositions
which compose it, and lives and thrives in the contemplation
of them. In them it finds the motives for
devotion and faithful obedience; while theology on the
other hand forms and protects them by virtue of its
function of regarding them, not merely one by one, but
as a system of truth.
</p>

<p>
One other remark is in place here. If the separate
articles of the Athanasian Creed are so closely connected
with vital and personal religion as I have shown them to
be, if they supply motives on which a man may act, if
they determine the state of mind, the special thoughts,
affections, and habits, which he carries with him from
this world to the next, is there cause to wonder, that the
Creed should proclaim aloud, that those who are not internally
such as Christ, by means of it, came to make them,
are not capable of the heaven to which He died to bring
them? Is not the importance of accepting the dogma
the very explanation of that careful minuteness with
which the few simple truths which compose it are inculcated,
are reiterated, in the Creed? And shall the Church
of God, to whom <q>the dispensation</q> of the Gospel is
committed, forget the concomitant obligation, <q>Woe is
unto me if I preach not the Gospel</q>? Are her ministers
by their silence to bring upon themselves the Prophet's
anathema, <q>Cursed is he that doth the work of the
Lord deceitfully</q>? Can they ever forget the lesson
conveyed to them in the Apostle's protestation, <q>God is
faithful, as our preaching which was among you was not
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
Yea and Nay.... For we are a good odour of Christ
unto God in them that are in the way of salvation, and
in them that are perishing. For we are not as the many,
who adulterate the word of God; but with sincerity, but
as from God, in the presence of God, so speak we in
Christ</q>?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 3. Belief in Dogmatic Theology.</head>

<p>
It is a familiar charge against the Catholic Church in the
mouths of her opponents, that she imposes on her children
as matters of faith, not only such dogmas as have an
intimate bearing on moral conduct and character, but a
great number of doctrines which none but professed theologians
can understand, and which in consequence do
but oppress the mind, and are the perpetual fuel of controversy.
The first who made this complaint was no
less a man than the great Constantine, and on no less an
occasion than the rise of the Arian heresy, which he, as
yet a catechumen, was pleased to consider a trifling and
tolerable error. So, deciding the matter, he wrote at
once a letter to Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, and to
Arius, who was a presbyter in the same city, exhorting
them to drop the matter in dispute, and to live in peace
with one another. He was answered by the meeting of
the Council of Nicæa, and by the insertion of the word
<q>Consubstantial</q> into the Creed of the Church.
</p>

<p>
What the Emperor thought of the controversy itself,
that Bishop Jeremy Taylor thought of the insertion of the
<q>Consubstantial,</q> viz. that it was a mischievous affair,
and ought never to have taken place. He thus quotes
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
and comments on the Emperor's letter: <q>The Epistle of
Constantine to Alexander and Arius tells the truth, and
chides them both for commencing the question, Alexander
for broaching it, Arius for taking it up. And although
this be true, that it had been better for the Church it
had never begun, yet, being begun, what is to be done
with it? Of this also, in that admirable epistle, we have
the Emperor's judgment (I suppose not without the advice
and privity of Hosius), ... for first he calls it a certain
vain piece of a question, ill begun, and more unadvisedly
published,&mdash;a question which no law or ecclesiastical
canon defineth; a fruitless contention; the product of
idle brains; a matter so nice, so obscure, so intricate,
that it was neither to be explicated by the clergy nor
understood by the people; a dispute of words, a doctrine
inexplicable, but most dangerous when taught, lest it
introduce discord or blasphemy; and, therefore, the
objector was rash, and the answer unadvised, for it concerned
not the substance of faith or the worship of God,
nor the chief commandment of Scripture; and, therefore,
why should it be the matter of discord? for though the
matter be grave, yet, because neither necessary nor explicable,
the contention is trifling and toyish.... So that
the matter being of no great importance, but vain and a
toy in respect of the excellent blessings of peace and
charity, it were good that Alexander and Arius should
leave contending, keep their opinions to themselves, ask
each other forgiveness, and give mutual toleration.<note place='foot'>Liberty
of Prophesying, § 2.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, Taylor is of opinion that <q>they both did
believe One God, and the Holy Trinity;</q> an opinion in
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
the teeth of historical fact. Also he is of opinion, that
<q>that faith is best which hath greatest simplicity, and that
it is better in all cases humbly to submit, than curiously
to inquire and pry into the mystery under the cloud,
and to hazard our faith by improving knowledge.</q> He
is, further, of opinion, that <q>if the Nicene Fathers had
done so too, possibly the Church would never have
repented it.</q> He also thinks that their insertion of
the <q>Consubstantial</q> into the Creed was a bad precedent.
</p>

<p>
Whether it was likely to act as a precedent or not, it
has not been so in fact, for fifteen hundred years have
passed since the Nicene Council, and it is the one
instance of a scientific word having been introduced into
the Creed from that day to this. And after all, the
word in question has a plain meaning, as the Council
used it, easily stated and intelligible to all; for <q>consubstantial
with the Father,</q> means nothing more than
<q>really one with the Father,</q> being adopted to meet
the evasion of the Arians. The Creed then remains now
what it was in the beginning, a popular form of faith,
suited to every age, class, and condition. Its declarations
are categorical, brief, clear, elementary, of the first
importance, expressive of the concrete, the objects of
real apprehension, and the basis and rule of devotion.
As to the proper Nicene formula itself, excepting the
one term <q>Consubstantial,</q> it has not a word which
does not relate to the rudimental facts of Christianity.
The Niceno-Constantinopolitan and the various ante-Nicene
Symbols, of which the Apostles' is one, add
summarily one or two notional articles, such as <q>the
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
communion of Saints,</q> and <q>the forgiveness of sins,</q>
which, however, may be readily converted into real propositions.
On the other hand, one chief dogma, which
is easy to popular apprehension, is necessarily absent
from all of them, the Real Presence; but the omission
is owing to the ancient <q>Disciplina Arcani,</q> which
withheld the Sacred Mystery from catechumens and
heathen, to whom the Creed was known.
</p>

<p>
So far the charge which Taylor brings forward has no
great plausibility; but it is not the whole of his case.
I cannot deny that a large and ever-increasing collection
of propositions, abstract notions, not concrete truths,
become, by the successive definitions of Councils, a
portion of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credenda</foreign>,
and have an imperative claim
upon the faith of every Catholic; and this being the
case, it will be asked me how I am borne out by facts in
enlarging, as I have done, on the simplicity and directness,
on the tangible reality, of the Church's dogmatic
teaching.
</p>

<p>
I will suppose the objection urged thus:&mdash;why has
not the Catholic Church limited her
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credenda</foreign> to propositions
such as those in her Creed, concrete and practical,
easy of apprehension, and of a character to win assent?
such as <q>Christ is God;</q> <q>This is My Body;</q> <q>Baptism
gives life to the soul;</q> <q>The Saints intercede for
us;</q> <q>Death, judgment, heaven, hell, the four last
things;</q> <q>There are seven gifts of the Holy Ghost,</q>
<q>three theological virtues,</q> <q>seven capital sins,</q> and
the like, as they are found in her catechisms. On the
contrary, she makes it imperative on every one, priest
and layman, to profess as revealed truth all the canons of
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
the Councils, and innumerable decisions of Popes, propositions
so various, so notional, that but few can know
them, and fewer can understand them. What sense, for
instance, can a child or a peasant, nay, or any ordinary
Catholic, put upon the Tridentine Canons, even in
translation? such as, <q>Siquis dixerit homines sine
Christi justitiâ, per quam nobis meruit, justificari, aut
per eam ipsam formaliter justos esse, anathema sit;</q> or
<q>Siquis dixerit justificatum peccare, dum intuitu æternæ
mercedis bene operatur, anathema sit.</q> Or again, consider
the very anathema annexed by the Nicene Council
to its Creed, the language of which is so obscure, that even
theologians differ about its meaning. It runs as follows:&mdash;<q>Those
who say that once the Son was not, and
before He was begotten He was not, and that He was
made out of that which was not, or who pretend that He
was of other hypostasis or substance, or that the Son of
God is created, mutable, or alterable, the Holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church anathematizes.</q> These doctrinal
enunciations are <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de fide</foreign>;
peasants are bound to believe
them as well as controversialists, and to believe them as
truly as they believe that our Lord is God. How then
are the Catholic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credenda</foreign>
easy and within reach of all men?
</p>

<p>
I begin my answer to this objection by recurring to
what has already been said concerning the relation of
theology with its notional propositions to religious and
devotional assent. Devotion is excited doubtless by the
plain, categorical truths of revelation, such as the articles
of the Creed; on these it depends; with these it is satisfied.
It accepts them one by one; it is careless about
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
intellectual consistency; it draws from each of them the
spiritual nourishment which it was intended to supply.
Far different, certainly, is the nature and duty of the
intellect. It is ever active, inquisitive, penetrating; it
examines doctrine and doctrine; it compares, contrasts,
and forms them into a science; that science is theology.
Now theological science, being thus the exercise of the
intellect upon the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credenda</foreign>
of revelation, is, though not
directly devotional, at once natural, excellent, and necessary.
It is natural, because the intellect is one of our
highest faculties; excellent, because it is our duty to use
our faculties to the full; necessary, because, unless we
apply our intellect to revealed truth rightly, others will
exercise their minds upon it wrongly. Accordingly, the
Catholic intellect makes a survey and a catalogue of the
doctrines contained in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum</foreign>
of revelation, as committed to the Church's keeping; it locates, adjusts,
defines them each, and brings them together into a
whole. Moreover, it takes particular aspects or portions
of them; it analyzes them, whether into first principles
really such, or into hypotheses of an illustrative character.
It forms generalizations, and gives names to them. All
these deductions are true, if rightly deduced, because
they are deduced from what is true; and therefore in
one sense they are a portion of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum</foreign> of faith or
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credenda</foreign>, while in another sense they are
additions to it: however, additions or not, they have, I readily grant,
the characteristic disadvantage of being abstract and
notional statements.
</p>

<p>
Nor is this all: error gives opportunity to many more
additions than truth. There is another set of deductions,
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
inevitable also, and also part or not part of the revealed
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credenda</foreign>,
according as we please to view them. If a
proposition is true, its contradictory is false. If then a
man believes that Christ is God, he believes also, and
that necessarily, that to say He is not God is false, and
that those who so say are in error. Here then again
the prospect opens upon us of a countless multitude of
propositions, which in their first elements are close upon
devotional truth,&mdash;of groups of propositions, and those
groups divergent, independent, ever springing into life
with an inexhaustible fecundity, according to the ever-germinating
forms of heresy, of which they are the
antagonists. These too have their place in theological
science.
</p>

<p>
Such is theology in contrast to religion; and as follows
from the circumstances of its formation, though some of
its statements easily find equivalents in the language of
devotion, the greater number of them are more or less
unintelligible to the ordinary Catholic, as law-books
to the private citizen. And especially those portions of
theology which are the indirect creation, not of orthodox,
but of heretical thought, such as the repudiations of
error contained in the Canons of Councils, of which
specimens have been given above, will ever be foreign,
strange, and hard to the pious but uncontroversial mind;
for what have good Christians to do, in the ordinary
course of things, with the subtle hallucinations of the
intellect? This is manifest from the nature of the case;
but then the question recurs, why should the refutations
of heresy be our objects of faith? if no mind, theological
or not, can believe what it cannot understand, in what
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
sense can the Canons of Councils and other ecclesiastical
determinations be included in those
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>credenda</foreign> which the
Church presents to every Catholic as if apprehensible,
and to which every Catholic gives his firm interior
assent?
</p>

<p>
In solving this difficulty I wish it first observed, that,
if it is the duty of the Church to act as <q>the pillar
and ground of the Truth,</q> she is manifestly obliged
from time to time, and to the end of time, to denounce
opinions incompatible with that truth, whenever able
and subtle minds in her communion venture to publish
such opinions. Suppose certain Bishops and priests at
this day began to teach that Islamism or Buddhism was
a direct and immediate revelation from God, she would
be bound to use the authority which God has given her
to declare that such a proposition will not stand with
Christianity, and that those who hold it are none of
hers; and she would be bound to impose such a declaration
on that very knot of persons who had committed
themselves to the novel proposition, in order that, if
they would not recant, they might be separated from
her communion, as they were separate from her faith.
In such a case, her masses of population would either
not hear of the controversy, or they would at once take
part with her, and without effort take any test, which
secured the exclusion of the innovators; and she on the
other hand would feel that what is a rule for some
Catholics must be a rule for all. Who is to draw the
line between who are to acknowledge it, and who are
not? It is plain, there cannot be two rules of faith in
the same communion, or rather, as the case really would
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
be, an endless variety of rules, coming into force according
to the multiplication of heretical theories, and to the
degrees of knowledge and varieties of sentiment in individual
Catholics. There is but one rule of faith for all; and
it would be a greater difficulty to allow of an uncertain
rule of faith, than (if that was the alternative, as it is
not), to impose upon uneducated minds a profession
which they cannot understand.
</p>

<p>
But it is not the necessary result of unity of profession,
nor is it the fact, that the Church imposes
dogmatic statements on the interior assent of those
who cannot apprehend them. The difficulty is removed
by the dogma of the Church's infallibility, and of the
consequent duty of <q>implicit faith</q> in her word. The
<q>One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church</q> is an article
of the Creed, and an article, which, inclusive of her
infallibility, all men, high and low, can easily master
and accept with a real and operative assent. It stands
in the place of all abstruse propositions in a Catholic's
mind, for to believe in her word is virtually to believe
in them all. Even what he cannot understand, at least
he can believe to be true; and he believes it to be true
because he believes in the Church.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>rationale</emph> of this provision for unlearned devotion
is as follows:&mdash;It stands to reason that all of us, learned
and unlearned, are bound to believe the whole revealed
doctrine in all its parts and in all that it implies, according
as portion after portion is brought home to our consciousness
as belonging to it; and it also stands to reason,
that a doctrine, so deep and so various, as the revealed
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum</foreign>
of faith, cannot be brought home to us and
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
made our own all at once. No mind, however large,
however penetrating, can directly and fully by one act
understand any one truth, however simple. What can
be more intelligible than that <q>Alexander conquered
Asia,</q> or that <q>Veracity is a duty</q>? but what a multitude
of propositions is included under either of these
theses! still, if we profess either, we profess all that it
includes. Thus, as regards the Catholic Creed, if we
really believe that our Lord is God, we believe all that
is meant by such a belief; or, else, we are not in earnest,
when we profess to believe the proposition. In the act
of believing it at all, we forthwith commit ourselves by
anticipation to believe truths which at present we do not
believe, because they have never come before us;&mdash;we
limit henceforth the range of our private judgment in
prospect by the conditions, whatever they are, of that
dogma. Thus the Arians said that they believed in
our Lord's divinity, but when they were pressed to
confess His eternity, they denied it: thereby showing
in fact that they never had believed in His divinity
at all. In other words, a man who really believes in
our Lord's proper divinity, believes
<foreign rend='italic'>implicitè</foreign> in His
eternity.
</p>

<p>
And so, in like manner, of the whole
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum</foreign> of faith,
or the revealed word:&mdash;if we believe in the revelation,
we believe in what is revealed, in all that is revealed,
however it may be brought home to us, by reasoning or
in any other way. He who believes that Christ is the
Truth, and that the Evangelists are truthful, believes
all that He has said through them, though he has only
read St. Matthew and has not read St. John. He who
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
believes in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum</foreign>
of Revelation, believes in all the doctrines of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum</foreign>; and since he cannot know
them all at once, he knows some doctrines, and does not
know others; he may know only the Creed, nay, perhaps
only the chief portions of the Creed; but, whether he
knows little or much, he has the intention of believing
all that there is to believe, whenever and as soon as it is
brought home to him, if he believes in Revelation at all.
All that he knows now as revealed, and all that he shall
know, and all that there is to know, he embraces it all
in his intention by one act of faith; otherwise, it is but
an accident that he believes this or that, not because it
is a revelation. This virtual, interpretative, or prospective
belief is called a believing <foreign rend='italic'>implicitè</foreign>; and it follows
from this, that, granting that the Canons of Councils
and the other ecclesiastical documents and confessions,
to which I have referred, are really involved in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum</foreign>
or revealed word, every Catholic, in accepting the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum</foreign>, does
<foreign rend='italic'>implicitè</foreign> accept those dogmatic decisions.
</p>

<p>
I say, <q>granting these various propositions are virtually
contained in the revealed word,</q> for this is the
only question left; and that it is to be answered in the
affirmative, is clear at once to the Catholic, from the
fact that the Church declares that they really belong to it.
To her is committed the care and the interpretation of
the revelation. The word of the Church is the word of
the revelation. That the Church is the infallible oracle
of truth is the fundamental dogma of the Catholic
religion; and <q>I believe what the Church proposes to
be believed</q> is an act of real assent, including all particular
assents, notional and real; and, while it is possible
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
for unlearned as well as learned, it is imperative on
learned as well as unlearned. And thus it is, that by
believing the word of the Church <foreign rend='italic'>implicitè</foreign>, that is, by
believing all that that word does or shall declare itself
to contain, every Catholic, according to his intellectual
capacity, supplements the shortcomings of his knowledge
without blunting his real assent to what is elementary,
and takes upon himself from the first the
whole truth of revelation, progressing from one apprehension
of it to another according to his opportunities
of doing so.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part II. Assent And Inference.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Assent Considered As Unconditional.</head>

<p>
I have now said as much as need be said about the
relation of Assent to Apprehension, and shall turn to
the consideration of the relation existing between Assent
and Inference.
</p>

<p>
As apprehension is a concomitant, so inference is
ordinarily the antecedent of assent;&mdash;on this surely I
need not enlarge;&mdash;but neither apprehension nor inference
interferes with the unconditional character of the
assent, viewed in itself. The circumstances of an act,
however necessary to it, do not enter into the act;
assent is in its nature absolute and unconditional,
though it cannot be given except under certain conditions.
</p>

<p>
This is obvious; but what presents some difficulty
is this, how it is that a conditional acceptance of a
proposition,&mdash;such as is an act of inference,&mdash;is able to
lead, as it does, to an unconditional acceptance of it,&mdash;such
as is assent; how it is that a proposition which is
not, and cannot be, demonstrated, which at the highest
can only be proved to be truth-like, not true, such as
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
<q>I shall die,</q> nevertheless claims and receives our
unqualified adhesion. To the consideration of this paradox,
as it may be called, I shall now proceed; that
is, to the consideration, first, of the act of assent to a
proposition, which act is unconditional; next, of the act
of inference, which goes before the assent and is conditional;
and, thirdly, of the solution of the apparent
inconsistency which is involved in holding that an
unconditional acceptance of a proposition can be the
result of its conditional verification.
</p>

<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 1. Simple Assent.</head>

<p>
The doctrine which I have been enunciating requires
such careful explanation, that it is not wonderful that
writers of great ability and name are to be found who have
put it aside for a doctrine of their own; but no doctrine
on the subject is without its difficulties, and certainly not
theirs, though it carries with it a show of common
sense. The authors to whom I refer wish to maintain
that there are degrees of assent, and that, as the reasons
for a proposition are strong or weak, so is the assent.
It follows from this that absolute assent has no legitimate
exercise, except as ratifying acts of intuition or
demonstration. What is thus brought home to us is
indeed to be accepted unconditionally; but, as to reasonings
in concrete matters, they are never more than probabilities,
and the probability in each conclusion which
we draw is the measure of our assent to that conclusion.
Thus assent becomes a sort of necessary shadow, following
upon inference, which is the substance; and is never
without some alloy of doubt, because inference in the
concrete never reaches more than probability.
</p>

<p>
Such is what may be called the <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi> method of
regarding assent in its relation to inference. It condemns
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
an unconditional assent in concrete matters on
what may be called the nature of the case. Assent
cannot rise higher than its source; inference in such
matters is at best conditional, therefore assent is conditional
also.
</p>

<p>
Abstract argument is always dangerous, and this
instance is no exception to the rule; I prefer to go by
facts. The theory to which I have referred cannot be
carried out in practice. It may be rightly said to prove
too much; for it debars us from unconditional assent in
cases in which the common voice of mankind, the advocates
of this theory included, would protest against the
prohibition. There are many truths in concrete matter,
which no one can demonstrate, yet every one unconditionally
accepts; and though of course there are
innumerable propositions to which it would be absurd
to give an absolute assent, still the absurdity lies in the
circumstances of each particular case, as it is taken by
itself, not in their common violation of the pretentious
axiom that probable reasoning can never lead to certitude.
</p>

<p>
Locke's remarks on the subject are an illustration of
what I have been saying. This celebrated writer, after
the manner of his school, speaks freely of degrees of
assent, and considers that the strength of assent given
to each proposition varies with the strength of the
inference on which the assent follows; yet he is obliged
to make exceptions to his general principle,&mdash;exceptions,
unintelligible on his abstract doctrine, but demanded by
the logic of facts. The practice of mankind is too
strong for the antecedent theorem, to which he is
desirous to subject it.
</p>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<p>
First he says, in his chapter <q>On Probability,</q>
<q>Most of the propositions we think, reason, discourse,
nay, act upon, are such as we cannot have undoubted
knowledge of their truth; yet some of them <emph>border so
near</emph> upon certainty, that we <emph>make no doubt at all</emph> about
them, but <emph>assent</emph> to them <emph>as firmly</emph>, and act according to
that assent as resolutely, <emph>as if they were infallibly
demonstrated</emph>, and that our knowledge of them was
perfect and certain.</q> Here he allows that inferences,
which are only <q>near upon certainty,</q> are so near, that
we legitimately accept them with <q>no doubt at all,</q>
and <q>assent to them as firmly as if they were infallibly
demonstrated.</q> That is, he affirms and sanctions the
very paradox to which I am committed myself.
</p>

<p>
Again; he says, in his chapter on <q>The Degrees of
Assent,</q> that <q>when any particular thing, consonant to
the constant observation of ourselves and others in the
like case, comes attested by the concurrent reports of all
that mention it, we receive it as easily, and build as
firmly upon it, as if it were certain knowledge, and we
reason and act thereupon, <emph>with as little doubt as if it were
perfect demonstration</emph>.</q> And he repeats, <q>These <emph>probabilities</emph>
rise so near to certainty, that they <emph>govern our
thoughts as absolutely</emph>, and influence all our actions as
fully, as <emph>the most evident demonstration</emph>; and in what
concerns us, we make little or no difference between
them and certain knowledge. <emph>Our belief thus grounded,
rises to assurance.</emph></q> Here again, <q>probabilities</q> may
be so strong as to <q>govern our thoughts as absolutely</q>
as sheer demonstration, so strong that belief, grounded
on them, <q>rises to assurance,</q> that is, certitude.
</p>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<p>
I have so high a respect both for the character and
the ability of Locke, for his manly simplicity of mind
and his outspoken candour, and there is so much in his
remarks upon reasoning and proof in which I fully
concur, that I feel no pleasure in considering him in
the light of an opponent to views, which I myself have
ever cherished as true with an obstinate devotion; and I
would willingly think that in the passage which follows
in his chapter on <q>Enthusiasm,</q> he is aiming at superstitious
extravagances which I should repudiate myself
as much as he can do; but, if so, his words go beyond
the occasion, and contradict what I have quoted from
him above.
</p>

<p>
<q>He that would seriously set upon the search of
truth, ought, in the first place, to prepare his mind
with a love of it. For he that loves it not will not
take much pains to get it, nor be much concerned
when he misses it. There is nobody, in the commonwealth
of learning, who does not profess himself a lover
of truth,&mdash;and there is not a rational creature, that
would not take it amiss, to be thought otherwise of.
And yet, for all this, one may truly say, there are very
few lovers of truth, for truth-sake, even amongst those
who persuade themselves that they are so. How a man
may know, whether he be so, in earnest, is worth
inquiry; and I think, there is this one unerring mark
of it, viz. <emph>the not entertaining any proposition with greater
assurance than the proofs it is built on will warrant</emph>.
Whoever goes beyond this measure of assent, it is plain,
receives not truth in the love of it, loves not truth
for truth-sake, but for some other by-end. For the
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
evidence that any proposition is true (<emph>except such as
are self-evident</emph>) lying only in the proofs a man has
of it, whatsoever degrees of assent he affords it <emph>beyond
the degrees of that</emph> evidence, it is plain <emph>all that surplusage
of assurance</emph> is owing to some other affection, and not to
the love of truth; it being as <emph>impossible</emph> that the love
of truth should carry <emph>my assent above the evidence</emph> there
is to me that it is true, as that the love of truth should
make me assent to any proposition for the sake of that
evidence which it has not that it is true; which is in
effect to love it as a truth, because it is possible or probable
that it may not be true.<note place='foot'>This passage is already quoted
in my <q>Essay on Development of
Doctrine,</q> vi. 1, § 2.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
Here he says that it is not only illogical, but immoral
to <q>carry our <emph>assent above</emph> the <emph>evidence</emph> that a proposition
is true,</q> to have <q>a surplusage of <emph>assurance beyond</emph> the
degrees of that evidence.</q> And he excepts from this rule
only self-evident propositions. How then is it not inconsistent
with right reason, with the love of truth for its
own sake, to allow, in his words quoted above, certain
strong <q>probabilities</q> to <q>govern our thoughts as
absolutely as the most evident demonstration</q>? how
is there no <q>surplusage of assurance beyond the degrees
of evidence</q> when in the case of those strong probabilities,
we permit <q>our belief, thus grounded, to rise to
assurance,</q> as he pronounces we are rational in doing?
Of course he had in view one set of instances, when he
implied that demonstration was the condition of absolute
assent, and another set when he said that it was no such
condition; but he surely cannot be acquitted of slovenly
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
thinking in thus treating a cardinal subject. A philosopher
should so anticipate the application, and guard
the enunciation of his principles, as to secure them
against the risk of their being made to change places
with each other, to defend what he is eager to denounce,
and to condemn what he finds it necessary to sanction.
However, whatever is to be thought of his <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi>
method and his logical consistency, his
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>animus</foreign>, I fear,
must be understood as hostile to the doctrine which I
am going to maintain. He takes a view of the human
mind, in relation to inference and assent, which to me
seems theoretical and unreal. Reasonings and convictions
which I deem natural and legitimate, he apparently
would call irrational, enthusiastic, perverse, and immoral;
and that, as I think, because he consults his own
ideal of how the mind ought to act, instead of interrogating
human nature, as an existing thing, as it is found
in the world. Instead of going by the testimony of psychological
facts, and thereby determining our constitutive
faculties and our proper condition, and being content
with the mind as God has made it, he would form men
as he thinks they ought to be formed, into something
better and higher, and calls them irrational and immoral,
if (so to speak) they take to the water, instead of remaining
under the narrow wings of his own arbitrary
theory.
</p>

<p>
1. Now the first question which this theory leads me
to consider is, whether there is such an act of the mind
as assent at all. If there is, it is plain it ought to show
itself unequivocally as such, as distinct from other acts.
For if a professed act can only be viewed as the recessary
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
and immediate repetition of another act, if assent is
a sort of reproduction and double of an act of inference,
if when inference determines that a proposition is somewhat,
or not a little, or a good deal, or very like truth,
assent as its natural and normal counterpart says that
it is somewhat, or not a little, or a good deal, or very
like truth, then I do not see what we mean by saying,
or why we say at all, that there is any such act. It is
simply superfluous, in a psychological point of view, and
a curiosity of subtle minds, and the sooner it is got out
of the way the better. When I assent, I am supposed,
it seems, to do precisely what I do when I infer, or
rather not quite so much, but something which is
included in inferring; for, while the disposition of my
mind towards a given proposition is identical in assent
and in inference, I merely drop the thought of the premisses
when I assent, though not of their influence on
the proposition inferred. This, then, and no more after
all, is what nature prescribes; and this, and no more
than this, is the conscientious use of our faculties, so to
assent forsooth as to do nothing else than infer. Then,
I say, if this be really the state of the case, if assent in
no real way differs from inference, it is one and the
same thing with it. It is another name for inference,
and to speak of it at all does but mislead. Nor can it
fairly be urged as a parallel case that an act of conscious
recognition, though distinct from an act of knowledge,
is after all only its repetition. On the contrary, such a
recognition is a reflex act with its own object, viz. the
act of knowledge itself. As well might it be said that
the hearing of the notes of my voice is a repetition of
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
the act of singing:&mdash;it gives no plausibility then to the
anomaly I am combating.
</p>

<p>
I lay it down, then, as a principle that either assent
is intrinsically distinct from inference, or the sooner
we get rid of the word in philosophy the better. If
it be only the echo of an inference, do not treat it
as a substantive act; but on the other hand, supposing
it be not such an idle repetition, as I am sure
it is not, supposing the word <q>assent</q> does hold a
necessary place in language and in thought, if it does
not admit of being confused with concluding and inferring,
if the two words are used for two operations
of the intellect which cannot change their character, if
in matter of fact they are not always found together, if
they do not vary with each other, if one is sometimes
found without the other, if one is strong when the other
is weak, if sometimes they seem even in conflict with
each other, then, since we know perfectly well what an
inference is, it comes upon us to consider what, as distinct
from inference, an assent is, and we are, by the very
fact of its being distinct, advanced one step towards that
account of it which I think is the true one. The first
step then towards deciding the point, will be to inquire
what the experience of human life, as it is daily brought
before us, teaches us of the relation to each other of
inference and assent.
</p>

<p>
(1.) First, we know from experience that assents may
endure without the presence of the inferential acts upon
which they were originally elicited. It is plain, that,
as life goes on, we are not only inwardly formed and
changed by the accession of habits, but we are also enriched
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
by a great multitude of beliefs and opinions, and
that on a variety of subjects. These beliefs and opinions,
held, as some of them are, almost as first principles, are
assents, and they constitute, as it were, the clothing and
furniture of the mind. I have already spoken of them
under the head of <q>Credence</q> and <q>Opinion.</q> Sometimes
we are fully conscious of them; sometimes they
are implicit, or only now and then come directly before
our reflective faculty. Still they are assents; and, when
we first admitted them, we had some kind of reason,
slight or strong, recognized or not, for doing so. However,
whatever those reasons were, even if we ever
realized them, we have long forgotten them. Whether
it was the authority of others, or our own observation,
or our reading, or our reflections, which became the
warrant of our assent, any how we received the matters
in question into our minds as true, and gave them a
place there. We assented to them, and we still assent,
though we have forgotten what the warrant was. At
present they are self-sustained in our minds, and have
been so for long years; they are in no sense conclusions;
they imply no process of thought. Here then is a case
in which assent stands out as distinct from inference.
</p>

<p>
(2.) Again; sometimes assent fails, while the reasons
for it and the inferential act which is the recognition of
those reasons, are still present, and in force. Our reasons
may seem to us as strong as ever, yet they do not
secure our assent. Our beliefs, founded on them, were
and are not; we cannot perhaps tell when they went;
we may have thought that we still held them, till something
happened to call our attention to the state of our
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
minds, and then we found that our assent had become
an assertion. Sometimes, of course, a cause may be
found why they went; there may have been some vague
feeling that a fault lay at the ultimate basis, or in the
underlying conditions, of our reasonings; or some misgiving
that the subject-matter of them was beyond the
reach of the human mind; or a consciousness that we
had gained a broader view of things in general than
when we first gave our assent; or that there were strong
objections to our first convictions, which we had never
taken into account. But this is not always so; sometimes
our mind changes so quickly, so unaccountably, so
disproportionately to any tangible arguments to which
the change can be referred, and with such abiding recognition
of the force of the old arguments, as to suggest
the suspicion that moral causes, arising out of our condition,
age, company, occupations, fortunes, are at the
bottom. However, what once was assent is gone; yet
the perception of the old arguments remains, showing
that inference is one thing, and assent another.
</p>

<p>
(3.) And as assent sometimes dies out without tangible
reasons, sufficient to account for its failure, so
sometimes, in spite of strong and convincing arguments,
it is never given. We sometimes find men loud in their
admiration of truths which they never profess. As, by
the law of our mental constitution, obedience is quite
distinct from faith, and men may believe without practising,
so is assent also independent of our acts of inference.
Again, prejudice hinders assent to the most
incontrovertible proofs. Again, it not unfrequently
happens, that while the keenness of the ratiocinative
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
faculty enables a man to see the ultimate result of a
complicated problem in a moment, it takes years for
him to embrace it as a truth, and to recognize it as an
item in the circle of his knowledge. Yet he does at
last so accept it, and then we say that he assents.
</p>

<p>
(4.) Again; very numerous are the cases, in which
good arguments, and really good as far as they go, and
confessed by us to be good, nevertheless are not strong
enough to incline our minds ever so little to the conclusion
at which they point. But why is it that we do not
assent a little, in proportion to those arguments? On
the contrary, we throw the full
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>onus probandi</foreign> on the
side of the conclusion, and we refuse to assent to it at
all, until we can assent to it altogether. The proof is
capable of growth; but the assent either exists or does
not exist.
</p>

<p>
(5.) I have already alluded to the influence of moral
motives in hindering assent to conclusions which are
logically unimpeachable. According to the couplet,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>A man convinced against his will</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Is of the same opinion still;</q>&mdash;</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
assent then is not the same as inference.
</p>

<p>
(6.) Strange as it may seem, this contrast between
inference and assent is exemplified even in the province
of mathematics. Argument is not always able to command
our assent, even though it be demonstrative.
Sometimes of course it forces its way, that is, when the
steps of the reasoning are few, and admit of being
viewed by the mind altogether. Certainly, one cannot
conceive a man having before him the series of conditions
and truths on which it depends that the three
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
angles of a triangle are together equal to two right
angles, and yet not assenting to that proposition. Were
all propositions as plain, though assent would not in
consequence be the same act as inference, yet it would
certainly follow immediately upon it. I allow then as
much as this, that, when an argument is in itself and
by itself conclusive of a truth, it has by a law of our
nature the same command over our assent, or rather the
truth which it has reached has the same command, as
our senses have. Certainly our intellectual nature is
under laws, and the correlative of ascertained truth is
unreserved assent.
</p>

<p>
But I am not speaking of short and lucid demonstrations;
but of long and intricate mathematical investigations;
and in that case, though every step may be
indisputable, it still requires a specially sustained attention
and an effort of memory to have in the mind all at
once all the steps of the proof, with their bearings on
each other, and the antecedents which they severally
involve; and these conditions of the inference may
interfere with the promptness of our assent.
</p>

<p>
Hence it is that party spirit or national feeling or
religious prepossessions have before now had power to
retard the reception of truths of a mathematical character;
which never could have been, if demonstrations
were <hi rend='italic'>ipso facto</hi> assents. Nor indeed would any mathematician,
even in questions of pure science, assent to his
own conclusions, on new and difficult ground, and in the
case of abstruse calculations, however often he went over
his work, till he had the corroboration of other judgments
besides his own. He would have carefully revised his inference,
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
and would assent to the probability of his accuracy
in inferring, but still he would abstain from an immediate
assent to the truth of his conclusion. Yet the corroboration
of others cannot add to his perception of the proof; he
would still perceive the proof, even though he failed in
gaining their corroboration. And yet again he might
arbitrarily make it his rule, never to assent to his conclusions
without such corroboration, or at least before the
lapse of a sufficient interval. Here again inference is
distinct from assent.
</p>

<p>
I have been showing that inference and assent are
distinct acts of the mind, and that they may be made
apart from each other. Of course I cannot be taken to
mean that there is no legitimate or actual connexion
between them, as if arguments adverse to a conclusion
did not naturally hinder assent; or as if the inclination
to give assent were not greater or less according as the
particular act of inference expressed a stronger or weaker
probability; or as if assent did not always imply grounds
in reason, implicit, if not explicit, or could be rightly
given without sufficient grounds. So much is it commonly
felt that assent must be preceded by inferential
acts, that obstinate men give their own will as their very
reason for assenting, if they can think of nothing better;
<q>stat pro ratione voluntas.</q> Indeed, I doubt whether
assent is ever given without some preliminary, which
stands for a reason; but it does not follow from this,
that it may not be withheld in cases when there are
good reasons for giving it to a proposition, or may not
be withdrawn after it has been given, the reasons remaining,
or may not remain when the reasons are forgotten;
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
or must always vary in strength, as the reasons
vary; and this substantiveness, as I may call it, of the
act of assent is the very point which I have wished to
establish.
</p>

<p>
2. And in showing that assent is distinct from an act
of inference, I have gone a good way towards showing
in what it differs from it. If assent and inference are
each of them the acceptance of a proposition, but the
special characteristic of inference is that it is conditional,
it is natural to suppose that assent is unconditional.
Again, if assent is the acceptance of truth, and truth is
the proper object of the intellect, and no one can hold
conditionally what by the same act he holds to be true,
here too is a reason for saying that assent is an adhesion
without reserve or doubt to the proposition to which it
is given. And again, it is to be presumed that the word
has not two meanings: what it has at one time, it has
at another. Inference is always inference; even if
demonstrative, it is still conditional; it establishes an
incontrovertible conclusion on the condition of incontrovertible
premisses. To the conclusion thus drawn, assent
gives its absolute recognition. In the case of all demonstrations,
assent, when given, is unconditionally given.
In one class of subjects, then, assent certainly is always
unconditional; but if the word stands for an undoubting
and unhesitating act of the mind once, why does it not
denote the same always? what evidence is there that it
ever means any thing else than that which the whole
world will unite in witnessing that it means in certain
cases? why are we not to interpret what is controverted
by what is known? This is what is suggested
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
on the first view of the question; but to continue:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
In demonstrative matters assent excludes the presence
of doubt: now are instances producible, on the other hand,
of its ever co-existing with doubt in cases of the concrete?
As the above instances have shown, on very
many questions we do not give an assent at all. What
commonly happens is this, that, after hearing and entering
into what may be said for a proposition, we
pronounce neither for nor against it. We may accept
the conclusion as a conclusion, dependent on premisses,
abstract, and tending to the concrete; but we do not
follow up our inference of a proposition by giving an
assent to it. That there are concrete propositions to
which we give unconditional assents, I shall presently
show; but I am now asking for instances of conditional,
for instances in which we assent a little and not much.
Usually, we do not assent at all. Every day, as it
comes, brings with it opportunities for us to enlarge our
circle of assents. We read the newspapers; we look
through debates in Parliament, pleadings in the law
courts, leading articles, letters of correspondents, reviews
of books, criticisms in the fine arts, and we either form
no opinion at all upon the subjects discussed, as lying
out of our line, or at most we have only an opinion
about them. At the utmost we say that we are inclined
to believe this proposition or that, that we are not sure it
is not true, that much may be said for it, that we have
been much struck by it; but we never say that we give
it a degree of assent. We might as well talk of degrees
of truth as of degrees of assent.
</p>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<p>
Yet Locke heads one of his chapters with the title
<q>Degrees of Assent;</q> and a writer, of this century,
who claims our respect from the tone and drift of his
work, thus expresses himself after Locke's manner:
<q>Moral evidence,</q> he says, <q>may produce a variety of
degrees of assents, from suspicion to moral certainty.
For, here, the degree of assent depends upon the degree
in which the evidence on one side preponderates, or
exceeds that on the other. And as this preponderancy
may vary almost infinitely, so likewise may the degrees
of assent. For a few of these degrees, though but for a
few, names have been invented. Thus, when the evidence
on one side preponderates a very little, there is
ground for suspicion, or conjecture. Presumption, persuasion,
belief, conclusion, conviction, moral certainty,&mdash;doubt,
wavering, distrust, disbelief,&mdash;are words which
imply an increase or decrease of this preponderancy.
Some of these words also admit of epithets which denote
a further increase or diminution of the assent.<note place='foot'>Gambier
on Moral Evidence, p. 6.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
Can there be a better illustration than this passage
supplies of what I have been insisting on above, viz.
that, in teaching various degrees of assent, we tend to
destroy assent, as an act of the mind, altogether? This
author makes the degrees of assent <q>infinite,</q> as the
degrees of probability are infinite. His assents are
really only inferences, and assent is a name without
a meaning, the needless repetition of an inference. But
in truth <q>suspicion, conjecture, presumption, persuasion,
belief, conclusion, conviction, moral certainty,</q> are not
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
<q>assents</q> at all; they are simply more or less strong
inferences of a proposition; and <q>doubt, wavering, distrust,
disbelief,</q> are recognitions, more or less strong, of
the probability of its contradictory.
</p>

<p>
There is only one sense in which we are allowed to
call such acts or states of mind assents. They are
opinions; and, as being such, they are, as I have already
observed, when speaking of Opinion, assents to the
plausibility, probability, doubtfulness, or untrustworthiness,
of a proposition; that is, not variations of assent
to an inference, but assents to a variation in inferences.
When I assent to a doubtfulness, or to a probability,
my assent, as such, is as complete as if I assented to a
truth; it is not a certain degree of assent. And, in
like manner, I may be certain of an uncertainty; that
does not destroy the specific notion convened in the word
<q>certain.</q>
</p>

<p>
I do not know then when it is that we ever deliberately
profess assent to a proposition without meaning
to convey to others the impression that we accept it
unreservedly, and that because it is true. Certainly,
we familiarly use such phrases as a half-assent, as we
also speak of half-truths; but a half-assent is not a
kind of assent any more than a half-truth is a kind of
truth. As the object is indivisible, so is the act. A
half-truth is a proposition which in one aspect is a
truth, and in another is not; to give a half-assent is to
feel drawn towards assent, or to assent one moment and
not the next, or to be in the way to assent to it. It
means that the proposition in question deserves a hearing,
that it is probable, or attractive, that it opens
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
important views, that it is a key to perplexing difficulties,
or the like.
</p>

<p>
3. Treating the subject then, not according to <hi rend='italic'>à priori</hi>
fitness, but according to the facts of human nature, as
they are found in the concrete action of life, I find
numberless cases in which we do not assent at all, none
in which assent is evidently conditional;&mdash;and many,
as I shall now proceed to show, in which it is unconditional,
and these in subject-matters which admit of
nothing higher than probable reasoning. If human
nature is to be its own witness, there is no medium
between assenting and not assenting. Locke's theory of
the duty of assenting more or less according to degrees
of evidence, is invalidated by the testimony of high and
low, young and old, ancient and modern, as continually
given in their ordinary sayings and doings. Indeed, as
I have shown, he does not strictly maintain it himself;
yet, though he feels the claims of nature and fact to be
too strong for him in certain cases, he gives no reason
why he should violate his theory in these, and yet not in
many more.
</p>

<p>
Now let us review some of those assents, which men
give on evidence short of intuition and demonstration,
yet which are as unconditional as if they had that
highest evidence.
</p>

<p>
First of all, starting from intuition, of course we all
believe, without any doubt, that we exist; that we have
an individuality and identity all our own; that we think,
feel, and act, in the home of our own minds; that we
have a present sense of good and evil, of a right and a
wrong, of a true and a false, of a beautiful and a hideous,
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
however we analyze our ideas of them. We have an
absolute vision before us of what happened yesterday or
last year, so as to be able without any chance of mistake
to give evidence upon it in a court of justice, let the
consequences be ever so serious. We are sure that of
many things we are ignorant, that of many things we
are in doubt, and that of many things we are not in doubt.
</p>

<p>
Nor is the assent which we give to facts limited to
the range of self-consciousness. We are sure beyond all
hazard of a mistake, that our own self is not the only
being existing; that there is an external world; that it
is a system with parts and a whole, a universe carried on
by laws; and that the future is affected by the past.
We accept and hold with an unqualified assent, that the
earth, considered as a phenomenon, is a globe; that all
its regions see the sun by turns; that there are vast tracts
on it of land and water; that there are really existing
cities on definite sites, which go by the names of London,
Paris, Florence, and Madrid. We are sure that Paris or
London, unless swallowed up by an earthquake or burned
to the ground, is to-day just what it was yesterday, when
we left it.
</p>

<p>
We laugh to scorn the idea that we had no parents,
though we have no memory of our birth; that we shall
never depart this life, though we can have no experience
of the future; that we are able to live without food,
though we have never tried; that a world of men did not
live before our time, or that that world has had no
history; that there has been no rise and fall of states,
no great men, no wars, no revolutions, no art, no science,
no literature, no religion.
</p>

<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>

<p>
We should be either indignant or amused at the report
of our intimate friend being false to us; and we are able
sometimes, without any hesitation, to accuse certain
parties of hostility and injustice to us. We may have a
deep consciousness, which we never can lose, that we on
our part have been cruel to others, and that they have
felt us to be so, or that we have been, and have been felt
to be, ungenerous to those who love us. We may have
an overpowering sense of our moral weakness, of the
precariousness of our life, health, wealth, position, and
good fortune. We may have a clear view of the weak
points of our physical constitution, of what food or
medicine is good for us, and what does us harm. We
may be able to master, at least in part, the course of
our past history; its turning-points, our hits, and our
great mistakes. We may have a sense of the presence of
a Supreme Being, which never has been dimmed by even
a passing shadow, which has inhabited us ever since we
can recollect any thing, and which we cannot imagine
our losing. We may be able, for others have been able,
so to realize the precepts and truths of Christianity, as
deliberately to surrender our life, rather than transgress
the one or to deny the other.
</p>

<p>
On all these truths we have an immediate and an
unhesitating hold, nor do we think ourselves guilty of
not loving truth for truth's sake, because we cannot reach
them through a series of intuitive propositions. Assent
on reasonings not demonstrative is too widely recognized
an act to be irrational, unless man's nature is irrational,
too familiar to the prudent and clear-minded to be an
infirmity or an extravagance. None of us can think or
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
act without the acceptance of truths, not intuitive, not
demonstrated, yet sovereign. If our nature has any constitution,
any laws, one of them is this absolute reception
of propositions as true, which lie outside the narrow
range of conclusions to which logic, formal or virtual, is
tethered; nor has any philosophical theory the power to
force on us a rule which will not work for a day.
</p>

<p>
When, then, philosophers lay down principles, on which
it follows that our assent, except when given to objects
of intuition or demonstration, is conditional, that the
assent given to propositions by well-ordered minds necessarily
varies with the proof producible for them, and that
it does not and cannot remain one and the same while
the proof is strengthened or weakened,&mdash;are they not
to be considered as confusing together two things very
distinct from each other, a mental act or state and a
scientific rule, an interior assent and a set of logical
formulas? When they speak of degrees of assent, surely
they have no intention at all of defining the position of
the mind itself relative to the adoption of a given conclusion,
but they mean to determine the relation of that
conclusion towards its premisses. They are contemplating
how representative symbols work, not how the intellect
is affected towards the thing which those symbols represent.
In real truth they as little mean to assert the
principle of measuring our assents by our logic, as they
would fancy they could record the refreshment which we
receive from the open air by the readings of the graduated
scale of a thermometer. There is a connexion doubtless
between a logical conclusion and an assent, as there is
between the variation of the mercury and our sensations;
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
but the mercury is not the cause of life and health, nor
is verbal argumentation the principle of inward belief.
If we feel hot or chilly, no one will convince us to the
contrary by insisting that the glass is at 60°. It is the
mind that reasons and assents, not a diagram on paper.
I may have difficulty in the management of a proof,
while I remain unshaken in my adherence to the conclusion.
Supposing a boy cannot make his answer to
some arithmetical or algebraical question tally with the
book, need he at once distrust the book? Does his trust
in it fall down a certain number of degrees, according to
the force of his difficulty? On the contrary, he keeps to
the principle, implicit but present to his mind, with
which he took up the book, that the book is more likely
to be right than he is; and this mere preponderance of
probability is sufficient to make him faithful to his belief
in its correctness, till its incorrectness is actually proved.
</p>

<p>
My own opinion is, that the class of writers of whom
I have been speaking, have themselves as little misgiving
about the truths which they pretend to weigh
out and measure, as their unsophisticated neighbours; but
they think it a duty to remind us, that since the full
etiquette of logical requirements has not been satisfied,
we must believe those truths at our peril. They warn us,
that an issue which can never come to pass in matter of
fact, is nevertheless in theory a possible supposition.
They do not, for instance, intend for a moment to imply
that there is even the shadow of a doubt that Great
Britain is an island, but they think we ought to know,
if we do not know, that there is no proof of the fact, in
mode and figure, equal to the proof of a proposition of
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
Euclid; and that in consequence they and we are all
bound to suspend our judgment about such a fact,
though it be in an infinitesimal degree, lest we should
seem not to love truth for truth's sake. Having made
their protest, they subside without scruple into that
same absolute assurance of only partially-proved truths,
which is natural to the illogical imagination of the
multitude.
</p>

<p>
4. It remains to explain some conversational expressions,
at first sight favourable to that doctrine of degrees
in assent, which I have been combating.
</p>

<p>
(1.) We often speak of giving a modified and qualified,
or a presumptive and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign> assent,
or (as I have already said) a half-assent to opinions or facts;
but these expressions admit of an easy explanation.
Assent, upon the authority of others is often, as I have
noticed, when speaking of notional assents, little more
than a profession or acquiescence or inference, not a real
acceptance of a proposition. I report, for instance, that
there was a serious fire in the town in the past night;
and then perhaps I add, that at least the morning
papers say so;&mdash;that is, I have perhaps no positive doubt
of the fact; still, by referring to the newspapers I imply
that I do not take on myself the responsibility of the
statement. In thus qualifying my apparent assent, I
show that it was not a genuine assent at all. In like
manner a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign>
assent is an assent to an antecedent
probability of a fact, not to the fact itself; as I
might give a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign>
assent to the Plurality of worlds
or to the personality of Homer, without pledging myself
to either absolutely. <q>Half-assent,</q> of which I spoke
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
above, is an inclination to assent, or again, an intention
of assenting, when certain difficulties are surmounted.
When we speak without thought, assent has as vague a
meaning as half-assent; but when we deliberately say,
<q>I assent,</q> we signify an act of the mind so definite, as
to admit of no change but that of its ceasing to be.
</p>

<p>
(2.) And so, too, though we sometimes use the phrase
<q>conditional assent,</q> yet we only mean thereby to say
that we will assent under certain contingencies. Of
course we may, if we please, include a condition in the
proposition to which our assent is given; and then, that
condition enters into the matter of the assent, but not
into the assent itself. To assent to&mdash;<q>If this man is in
a consumption, his days are numbered,</q>&mdash;is as little a
conditional assent, as to assent to&mdash;<q>Of this consumptive
patient the days are numbered,</q>&mdash;which, (though
without the conditional form,) is an equivalent proposition.
In such cases, strictly speaking, the assent is
given neither to antecedent nor consequent of the conditional
proposition, but to their connexion, that is, to
the enthymematic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inferentia</foreign>.
If we place the condition
external to the proposition, then the assent will be given
to <q>That <q>his days are numbered</q> is conditionally true;</q>
and of course we can assent to the conditionality of a
proposition as well as to its probability. Or again, if so
be, we may give our assent not only to the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inferentia</foreign> in
a complex conditional proposition, but to each of the
simple propositions, of which it is made up, besides.
<q>There will be a storm soon, for the mercury falls;</q>&mdash;here,
besides assenting to the connexion of the propositions,
we may assent also to <q>The mercury falls,</q> and to
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
<q>There will be a storm.</q> This is assenting to the premiss,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inferentia</foreign>,
and thing inferred, all at once;&mdash;we
assent to the whole syllogism, and to its component
parts.
</p>

<p>
(3.) In like manner are to be explained the phrases,
<q>deliberate assent,</q> a <q>rational assent;</q> a <q>sudden,</q>
<q>impulsive,</q> or <q>hesitating</q> assent. These expressions
denote, not kinds or qualities, but the circumstances of
assenting. A deliberate assent is an assent following
upon deliberation. It is sometimes called a conviction,
a word which commonly includes in its meaning two
acts, both the act of inference, and the act of assent consequent
upon the inference. This subject will be considered
in the next Section. On the other hand, a
hesitating assent is an assent to which we have been
slow and intermittent in coming; or an assent which,
when given, is thwarted and obscured by external and
flitting misgivings, though not such as to enter into the
act itself, or essentially to damage it.
</p>

<p>
There is another sense in which we speak of a hesitating
or uncertain assent; viz. when we assent in act,
but not in the habit of our minds. Till assent to a
doctrine or fact is my habit, I am at the mercy of
inferences contrary to it; I assent to-day, and give up my
belief, or incline to disbelief, to-morrow. I may find it
my duty, for instance, after the opportunity of careful
inquiry and inference, to assent to another's innocence,
whom I have for years considered guilty; but from
long prejudice I may be unable to carry my new assent
well about me, and may every now and then relapse into
momentary thoughts injurious to him.
</p>

<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>

<p>
(4.) A more plausible objection to the absolute absence
of all doubt or misgiving in an act of assent is found in
the use of the terms firm and weak assent, or in the
growth of belief and trust. Thus, we assent to the
events of history, but not with that fulness and force of
adherence to the received account of them with which we
realize a record of occurrences which are within our own
memory. And again, we assent to the praise bestowed
on a friend's good qualities with an energy which we do
not feel, when we are speaking of virtue in the abstract:
and if we are political partisans, our assent is very cold,
when we cannot refuse it, to representations made in
favour of the wisdom or patriotism of statesmen whom
we dislike. And then as to religious subjects we speak
of <q>strong</q> faith and <q>feeble</q> faith; of the faith which
would move mountains, and of the ordinary faith <q>without
which it is impossible to please God.</q> And as we can
grow in graces, so surely can we inclusively in faith.
Again we rise from one work of Christian Evidences
with our faith enlivened and invigorated; from another
perhaps with the distracted father's words in our mouth,
<q>I believe, help my unbelief.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now it is evident, first of all, that habits of mind may
grow, as being a something permanent and continuous;
and by assent growing, it is often only meant that the
habit grows and has greater hold upon the mind.
</p>

<p>
But again, when we carefully consider the matter, it
will be found that this increase or decrease of strength
does not lie in the assent itself, but in its circumstances
and concomitants; for instance, in the emotions, in the
ratiocinative faculty, or in the imagination.
</p>

<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>

<p>
For instance, as to the emotions, this strength of
assent may be nothing more than the strength of love,
hatred, interest, desire, or fear, which the object of the
assent elicits, and this is especially the case when that
object is of a religious nature. Such strength is adventitious
and accidental; it may come, it may go; it is
found in one man, not in another; it does not interfere
with the genuineness and perfection of the act of assent.
Balaam assented to the fact of his own intercourse with
the supernatural, as well as Moses; but, to use religious
language, he had light without love; his intellect was
clear, his heart was cold. Hence his faith would popularly
be considered wanting in strength. On the other
hand, prejudice implies strong assents to the disadvantage
of its object; that is, it encourages such assents,
and guards them from the chance of being lost.
</p>

<p>
Again, when a conclusion is recommended to us by
the number and force of the arguments in proof of it,
our recognition of them invests it with a luminousness,
which in one sense adds strength to our assent to it,
as it certainly does protect and embolden that assent.
Thus we assent to a review of recent events, which we
have studied from original documents, with a triumphant
peremptoriness which it neither occurs to us, nor is
possible for us, to exercise, when we make an act of
assent to the assassination of Julius Caesar, or to the
existence of the Abipones, though we are as securely
certain of these latter facts as of the doings and occurrences
of yesterday.
</p>

<p>
And further, all that I have said about the apprehension
of propositions is in point here. We may speak of
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
assent to our Lord's divinity as strong or feeble, according
as it is given to the reality as impressed upon the
imagination, or to the notion of it as entertained by the
intellect.
</p>

<p>
(5.) Nor, lastly, does this doctrine of the intrinsic integrity
and indivisibility (if I may so speak) of assent
interfere with the teaching of Catholic theology as to the
pre-eminence of strength in divine faith, which has a
supernatural origin, when compared with all belief which
is merely human and natural. For first, that pre-eminence
consists, not in its differing from human faith,
merely in degree of assent, but in its being superior in
nature and kind,<note place='foot'><q>Supernaturalis
mentis assensus, rebus fidei exhibitus, cùm præcipuè
dependeat à gratiâ Dei intrinsecus mentem illuminante et commovente,
potest esse, et est, major quocunque assensu certitudini naturali præstito,
seu ex motivis naturalibus orto,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;Dmouski, Instit. t. i. p. 28.</note>
so that the one does not admit of a
comparison with the other; and next, its intrinsic
superiority is not a matter of experience, but is above
experience.<note place='foot'><q>Hoc [viz. multo certior
est homo de eo quod audit à Deo qui falli non
potest, quàm de eo quod videt propriâ ratione quâ falli potest] intelligendum
est de certitudine fidei secundum appretiationem, non secundum
intentionem; nam sæpe contingit, ut scientia clariùs percipiatur ab intellectu,
atque ut connexio scientiæ cum veritate magis appareat, quàm
connexio fidei cum eâdem; cognitiones enim naturales, utpote captui
nostro accommodatæ, magis animum quietant, delectant, et veluti.
satiant.</q>&mdash;Scavini, Theol. Moral. t. ii. p. 428.</note>
Assent is ever assent;<note place='foot'><p><q>Suppono enim,
veritatem fidei non esse certiorem veritate metaphysicâ
aut geometricâ quoad modum assensionis, sed tantum quoad
modum adhæsionis; quia utrinque intellectus absolutè sine modo limitante
assentitur. Sola autem adhæsio voluntatis diversa est; quia in
actu fidei gratia seu habitus infusus roborat intellectum et voluntatem,
ne tam facilè mutentur aut perturbentur.</q>&mdash;Amort, Theol. t. i. p. 312.
</p>
<p>
<q>Hæc distinctio certitudinis [ex diversitate motivorum] extrinsecam
tantum differentiam importat, cùm omnis naturalis certitudo, formaliter
spectata, sit æqualis; debet enim essentialiter erroris periculum amovere,
exclusio autem periculi erroris in indivisibili consistit; aut enim babetur
aut non habetur.</q>&mdash;Dmouski, ibid. p. 27.</p></note> but in the assent
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
which follows on a divine announcement, and is vivified
by a divine grace, there is, from the nature of the case,
a transcendant adhesion of mind, intellectual and moral,
and a special self-protection,<note place='foot'><q>Fides
est certior omni veritate naturali, etiam geometricè aut metaphysicè
certâ; idque non solum certitudine adhæsionis sed etiam assentionis....
Intellectus sentit se in multis veritatibus etiam metaphysicè
certis posse per objectiones perturbari, e. g. si legat scepticos.... E
contrà circa ea, quæ constat esse revelata à Deo, nullus potest
perturbari.</q>&mdash;Amort,
ibid. p. 367.</note> beyond the operation of
those ordinary laws of thought, which alone have a place
in my discussion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 2. Complex Assent.</head>

<p>
I have been considering assent as the mental assertion
of an intelligible proposition, as an act of the intellect
direct, absolute, complete in itself, unconditional, arbitrary,
yet not incompatible with an appeal to argument,
and at least in many cases exercised unconsciously. On
this last characteristic of assent I have not dwelt, as
it has not come in my way; nor is it more than an
accident of acts of assent, though an ordinary accident.
That it is of ordinary occurrence cannot be doubted.
A great many of our assents are merely expressions of
our personal likings, tastes, principles, motives, and
opinions, as dictated by nature, or resulting from habit;
in other words, they are acts and manifestations of self:
now what is more rare than self-knowledge? In proportion
then to our ignorance of self, is our unconsciousness
of those innumerable acts of assent, which we are
incessantly making. And so again in what may be
almost called the mechanical operation of our minds,
in our continual acts of apprehension and inference,
speculation, and resolve, propositions pass before us and
receive our assent without our consciousness. Hence it
is that we are so apt to confuse together acts of assent
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
and acts of inference. Indeed, I may fairly say, that
those assents which we give with a direct knowledge of
what we are doing, are few compared with the multitude
of like acts which pass through our minds in long
succession without our observing them.
</p>

<p>
That mode of assent which is exercised thus unconsciously,
I may call simple assent, and of it I have treated
in the foregoing Section; but now I am going to speak
of such assents as must be made consciously and deliberately,
and which I shall call complex or reflex
assents. And I begin by recalling what I have already
stated about the relation in which Assent and Inference
stand to each other,&mdash;Inference, which holds propositions
conditionally, and Assent, which unconditionally accepts
them; the relation is this:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Acts of inference are both the antecedents of assent
before assenting, and its usual concomitants after assenting.
For instance, I hold absolutely that the country
which we call India exists, upon trustworthy testimony;
and next, I may continue to believe it on the same testimony.
In like manner, I have ever believed that Great
Britain is an island, for certain sufficient reasons; and
on the same reasons I may persist in the belief. But it
may happen that I forget my reasons for what I believe
to be so absolutely true; or I may never have asked myself
about them, or formally marshalled them in order, and
have been accustomed to assent without a recognition of
my assent or of its grounds, and then perhaps something
occurs which leads to my reviewing and completing those
grounds, analyzing and arranging them, yet without on
that account implying of necessity any suspense, ever so
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
slight, of assent, to the proposition that India is in a certain
part of the earth, and that Great Britain is an island.
With no suspense of assent at all; any more than the
boy in my former illustration had any doubt about the
answer set down in his arithmetic-book, when he began
working out the question; any more than he would be
doubting his eyes and his common sense, that the two
sides of a triangle are together greater than the third,
because he drew out the geometrical proof of it. He
does but repeat, after his formal demonstration, that
assent which he made before it, and assents to his previous
assenting. This is what I call a reflex or complex
assent.
</p>

<p>
I say, there is no necessary incompatibility between
thus assenting and yet proving,&mdash;for the conclusiveness
of a proposition is not synonymous with its truth. A
proposition may be true, yet not admit of being concluded;&mdash;it
may be a conclusion and yet not a truth.
To contemplate it under one aspect, is not to contemplate
it under another; and the two aspects may be
consistent, from the very fact that they are two <emph>aspects</emph>.
Therefore to set about concluding a proposition is not
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipso facto</foreign>
to doubt its truth; we may aim at inferring a
proposition, while all the time we assent to it. We
have to do this as a common occurrence, when we take
on ourselves to convince another on any point in which
he differs from us. We do not deny our faith, because
we become controversialists; and in like manner we may
employ ourselves in proving what we believe to be true,
simply in order to ascertain the producible evidence in
its favour, and in order to fulfil what is due to ourselves
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
and to the claims and responsibilities of our education
and social position.
</p>

<p>
I have been speaking of investigation, not of inquiry;
it is quite true that inquiry is inconsistent with assent,
but inquiry is something more than the mere exercise of
inference. He who inquires has not found; he is in
doubt where the truth lies, and wishes his present profession
either proved or disproved. We cannot without
absurdity call ourselves at once believers and inquirers
also. Thus it is sometimes spoken of as a hardship that
a Catholic is not allowed to inquire into the truth of
his Creed;&mdash;of course he cannot, if he would retain the
name of believer. He cannot be both inside and outside
of the Church at once. It is merely common sense to
tell him that, if he is seeking, he has not found. If
seeking includes doubting, and doubting excludes believing,
then the Catholic who sets about inquiring,
thereby declares that he is not a Catholic. He has
already lost faith. And this is his best defence to himself
for inquiring, viz. that he is no longer a Catholic,
and wishes to become one. They who would forbid him
to inquire, would in that case be shutting the stable-door
after the steed is stolen. What can he do better
than inquire, if he is in doubt? how else can he become
a Catholic again? Not to inquire is in his case to be
satisfied with disbelief.
</p>

<p>
However, in thus speaking, I am viewing the matter
in the abstract, and without allowing for the manifold
inconsistencies of individuals, as they are found in the
world, who attempt to unite incompatibilities; who do
not doubt, but who act as if they did; who, though they
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
believe, are weak in faith, and put themselves in the
way of losing it by unnecessarily listening to objections.
Moreover, there are minds, undoubtedly, with whom at
all times to question a truth is to make it questionable,
and to investigate is equivalent to inquiring; and again,
there may be beliefs so sacred or so delicate, that, if I
may use the metaphor, they will not wash without
shrinking and losing colour. I grant all this; but here
I am discussing broad principles, not individual cases;
and these principles are, that inquiry implies doubt, and
that investigation does not imply it, and that those who
assent to a doctrine or fact may without inconsistency
investigate its credibility, though they cannot literally
inquire about its truth.
</p>

<p>
Next, I consider that, in the case of educated minds,
investigations into the argumentative proof of the things
to which they have given their assent, is an obligation,
or rather a necessity. Such a trial of their intellects is
a law of their nature, like the growth of childhood into
manhood, and analogous to the moral ordeal which is
the instrument of their spiritual life. The lessons of
right and wrong, which are taught them at school, are
to be carried out into action amid the good and evil of
the world; and so again the intellectual assents, in
which they have in like manner been instructed from the
first, have to be tested, realized, and developed by the
exercise of their mature judgment.
</p>

<p>
Certainly, such processes of investigation, whether in
religious subjects or secular, often issue in the reversal
of the assents which they were originally intended to
confirm; as the boy who works out an arithmetical
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
problem from his book may end in detecting, or thinking
he detects, a false print in the answer. But the
question before us is whether acts of assent and of
inference are compatible; and my vague consciousness
of the possibility of a reversal of my belief in the course
of my researches, as little interferes with the honesty
and firmness of that belief while those researches proceed,
as the recognition of the possibility of my train's
oversetting is an evidence of an intention on my part
of undergoing so great a calamity. My mind is not
moved by a scientific computation of chances, nor can
any law of averages affect my particular case. To incur
a risk is not to expect reverse; and if my opinions are
true, I have a right to think that they will bear examining.
Nor, on the other hand, does belief, viewed in
its idea, imply a positive resolution in the party believing
never to abandon that belief. What belief, as such,
does imply is, not an intention never to change, but the
utter absence of all thought, or expectation, or fear of
changing. A spontaneous resolution never to change
is inconsistent with the idea of belief; for the very force
and absoluteness of the act of assent precludes any such
resolution. We do not commonly determine not to do
what we cannot fancy ourselves ever doing. We should
readily indeed make such a formal promise if we were
called upon to do so; for, since we have the truth, and
truth cannot change, how can we possibly change in our
belief, except indeed through our own weakness or
fickleness? We have no intention whatever of being
weak or fickle; so our promise is but the natural
guarantee of our sincerity. It is possible then, without
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
disloyalty to our convictions, to examine their grounds,
even though in the event they are to fail under the
examination, for we have no suspicion of this failure.
</p>

<p>
And such examination, as I have said, does but fulfil
a law of our nature. Our first assents, right or wrong,
are often little more than prejudices. The reasonings,
which precede and accompany them, though sufficient
for their purpose, do not rise up to the importance and
energy of the assents themselves. As time goes on, by
degrees and without set purpose, by reflection and experience,
we begin to confirm or to correct the notions and
the images to which those assents are given. At times
it is a necessity formally to undertake a survey and revision
of this or that class of them, of those which relate
to religion, or to social duty, or to politics, or to the
conduct of life. Sometimes this review begins in doubt
as to the matters which we propose to consider, that is,
in a suspension of the assents hitherto familiar to us;
sometimes those assents are too strong to allow of being
lost on the first stirring of the inquisitive intellect, and
if, as time goes on, they give way, our change of mind,
be it for good or for evil, is owing to the accumulating
force of the arguments, sound or unsound, which bear
down upon the propositions which we have hitherto
received. Objections, indeed, as such, have no direct
force to weaken assent; but, when they multiply, they
tell against the implicit reasonings or the formal inferences
which are its warrant, and suspend its acts and
gradually undermine its habit. Then the assent goes;
but whether slowly or suddenly, noticeably or imperceptibly,
is a matter of circumstance or accident. However,
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
whether the original assent is continued on or not,
the new assent differs from the old in this, that it has
the strength of explicitness and deliberation, that it is
not a mere prejudice, and its strength the strength of
prejudice. It is an assent, not only to a given proposition,
but to the claim of that proposition on our assent
as true; it is an assent to an assent, or what is commonly
called a conviction.
</p>

<p>
Of course these reflex acts may be repeated in a series.
As I pronounce that <q>Great Britain is an island,</q> and
then pronounce <q>That <q>Great Britain is an island</q> has
a claim on my assent,</q> or is to <q>be assented-to,</q> or to
be <q>accepted as true,</q> or to be <q>believed,</q> or simply
<q>is true</q> (these predicates being equivalent), so I may
proceed, <q>The proposition <q>that <emph>Great-Britain-is-an-island</emph>
is to be believed,</q> is to be believed,</q> &amp;c., &amp;c., and
so on to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>.
But this would be trifling. The
mind is like a double mirror, in which reflexions of self
within self multiply themselves till they are undistinguishable,
and the first reflexion contains all the rest.
At the same time, it is worth while to notice two other
reflex propositions:&mdash;<q>That <q>Great Britain is an island</q>
is probable</q> is true;&mdash;and <q>That <q>Great Britain is an
island</q> is uncertain</q> is true:&mdash;for the former of these is
the expression of Opinion, and the latter of formal or
theological Doubt, as I have already determined.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I have one step farther to make:&mdash;let the proposition
to which the assent is given be as absolutely true as the
reflex act pronounces it to be, that is, objectively true as
well as subjectively:&mdash;then the assent may be called a
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
<emph>perception</emph>, the conviction a <emph>certitude</emph>, the proposition or
truth a <emph>certainty</emph>, or thing known, or a matter of <emph>knowledge</emph>,
and to assent to it is to <emph>know</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Of course, in thus speaking, I open the all-important
question, what is truth, and what apparent truth? what
is genuine knowledge, and what is its counterfeit? what
are the tests for discriminating certitude from mere
persuasion or delusion? Whatever a man holds to be
true, he will say he holds for certain; and for the
present I must allow him in his assumption, hoping in
one way or another, as I proceed, to lessen the difficulties
which lie in the way of calling him to account for
so doing. And I have the less scruple in taking this
course, as believing that, among fairly prudent and
circumspect men, there are far fewer instances of false
certitude than at first sight might be supposed. Men
are often doubtful about propositions which are really
true; they are not commonly certain of such as are
simply false. What they judge to be a certainty is in
matter of fact for the most part a truth. Not that
there is not a great deal of rash talking even among the
educated portion of the community, and many a man
makes professions of certitude, for which he has no
warrant; but that such off-hand, confident language is
no token how these persons will express themselves when
brought to book. No one will with justice consider
himself certain of any matter, unless he has sufficient
reasons for so considering; and it is rare that what is
not true should be so free from every circumstance and
token of falsity as to create no suspicion in his mind to
its disadvantage, no reason for suspense of judgment.
</p>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<p>
However, I shall have to remark on this difficulty by
and by; here I will mention two conditions of certitude,
in close connexion with that necessary preliminary of
investigation and proof of which I have been speaking,
which will throw some light upon it. The one, which
is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à priori</foreign>,
or from the nature of the case, will tell us
what is not certitude; the other, which is
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à posteriori</foreign>,
or from experience, will tell us in a measure what certitude
is.
</p>

<p>
1. Certitude, as I have said, is the perception of a
truth with the perception that it is a truth, or the consciousness
of knowing, as expressed in the phrase, <q>I
know that I know,</q> or <q>I know that I know that I
know,</q>&mdash;or simply <q>I know;</q> for one reflex assertion of
the mind about self sums up the series of self-consciousnesses
without the need of any actual evolution of them.
</p>

<p>
Certitude is the knowledge of a truth:&mdash;but what is
once true is always true, and cannot fail, whereas what
is once known need not always be known, and is capable
of failing. It follows, that if I am certain of a thing, I
believe it will remain what I now hold it to be, even
though my mind should have the bad fortune to let it
drop. Since mere argument is not the measure of
assent, no one can be called certain of a proposition,
whose mind does not spontaneously and promptly reject,
on their first suggestion, as idle, as impertinent, as
sophistical, any objections which are directed against its
truth. No man is certain of a truth, who can endure
the thought of the fact of its contradictory existing or
occurring; and that not from any set purpose or effort to
reject that thought, but, as I have said, by the spontaneous
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
action of the intellect. What is contradictory to the truth,
with its apparatus of argument, fades out of the mind as
fast as it enters it; and though it be brought back to the
mind ever so often by the pertinacity of an opponent, or
by a voluntary or involuntary act of imagination, still that
contradictory proposition and its arguments are mere
phantoms and dreams, in the light of our certitude, and
their very entering into the mind is the first step of their
going out of it. Such is the position of our minds
towards the heathen fancy that Enceladus lies under
Etna; or, not to take so extreme a case, that Joanna
Southcote was a messenger from heaven, or the Emperor
Napoleon really had a star. Equal to this peremptory
assertion of negative propositions is the revolt of the
mind from suppositions incompatible with positive statements
of which we are certain, whether abstract truths
or facts; as that a straight line is the longest possible
distance between its two extreme points, that Great
Britain is in shape an exact square or circle, that I shall
escape dying, or that my intimate friend is false to me.
</p>

<p>
We may indeed say, if we please, that a man ought
not to have so supreme a conviction in a given case, or
in any case whatever; and that he is therefore wrong in
treating opinions which he does not himself hold, with
this even involuntary contempt;&mdash;certainly, we have a
right to say so, if we will; but if, in matter of fact, a
man has such a conviction, if he is sure that Ireland is
to the West of England, or that the Pope is the Vicar of
Christ, nothing is left to him, if he would be consistent,
but to carry his conviction out into this magisterial
intolerance of any contrary assertion; and if he were in
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
his own mind tolerant, I do not say patient (for patience
and gentleness are moral duties, but I mean intellectually
tolerant), of objections as objections, he would virtually
be giving countenance to the views which those
objections represented. I say I certainly should be very
intolerant of such a notion as that I shall one day be
Emperor of the French; I should think it too absurd
even to be ridiculous, and that I must be mad before I
could entertain it. And did a man try to persuade me
that treachery, cruelty, or ingratitude were as praiseworthy
as honesty and temperance, and that a man who
lived the life of a knave and died the death of a brute
had nothing to fear from future retribution, I should
think there was no call on me to listen to his arguments,
except with the hope of converting him, though he
called me a bigot and a coward for refusing to inquire
into his speculations. And if, in a matter in which my
temporal interests were concerned, he attempted to
reconcile me to fraudulent acts by what he called
philosophical views, I should say to him, <q>Retro Satana,</q>
and that, not from any suspicion of his ability to reverse
immutable principles, but from a consciousness of my
own moral changeableness, and a fear, on that account,
that I might not be intellectually true to the truth.
This, then, from the nature of the case, is a main
characteristic of certitude in any matter, to be confident
indeed that that certitude will last, but to be confident
of this also, that, if it did fail, nevertheless, the thing
itself, whatever it is, of which we are certain, will remain
just as it is, true and irreversible. If this be so, it is
easy to instance cases of an adherence to propositions,
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
which does not fulfil the conditions of certitude; for
instance:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1.) How positive and circumstantial disputants may
be on both sides of a question of fact, on which they
give their evidence, till they are called to swear to it,
and then how guarded and conditional their testimony
becomes! Again, how confident are they in their rival
accounts of a transaction at which they were present,
till a third person makes his appearance, whose word
will be decisive about it! Then they suddenly drop
their tone, and trim their statements, and by provisos
and explanations leave themselves loopholes for escape,
in case his testimony should turn out to their disadvantage.
At first no language could be too bold or
absolute to express the distinctness of their knowledge
on this side or that; but second thoughts are best, and
their giving way shows that their belief does not come
up to the mark of certitude.
</p>

<p>
(2.) Again, can we doubt that many a confident
expounder of Scripture, who is so sure that St. Paul
meant this, and that St. John and St. James did not
mean that, would be seriously disconcerted at the
presence of those Apostles, if their presence were possible,
and that they have now an especial <q>boldness of
speech</q> in treating their subject, because there is no one
authoritatively to set them right, if they are wrong?
</p>

<p>
(3.) Take another instance, in which the absence of
certitude is professed from the first. Though it is a
matter of faith with Catholics that miracles never cease
in the Church, still that this or that professed miracle
really took place, is for the most part only a matter of
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
opinion, and when it is believed, whether on testimony
or tradition, it is not believed to the exclusion of all
doubt, whether about the fact or its miraculousness.
Thus I may believe in the liquefaction of St. Pantaleon's
blood, and believe it to the best of my judgment to be
a miracle, yet, supposing a chemist offered to produce
exactly the same phenomena under exactly similar circumstances
by the materials put at his command by his
science, so as to reduce what seemed beyond nature
within natural laws, I should watch with some suspense
of mind and misgiving the course of his experiment, as
having no Divine Word to fall back upon as a ground
of certainty that the liquefaction was miraculous.
</p>

<p>
(4.) Take another virtual exhibition of fear; I mean
irritation and impatience of contradiction, vehemence of
assertion, determination to silence others,&mdash;these are the
tokens of a mind which has not yet attained the tranquil
enjoyment of certitude. No one, I suppose, would say
that he was certain of the Plurality of worlds: that
uncertitude on the subject is just the explanation, and
the only explanation satisfactory to my mind, of the
strange violence of language which has before now
dishonoured the philosophical controversy upon it.
Those who are certain of a fact are indolent disputants;
it is enough for them that they have the truth; and they
have little disposition, except at the call of duty, to
criticize the hallucinations of others, and much less are
they angry at their positiveness or ingenuity in
argument; but to call names, to impute motives, to
accuse of sophistry, to be impetuous and overbearing, is
the part of men who are alarmed for their own position,
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
and fear to have it approached too nearly. And in like
manner the intemperance of language and of thought,
which is sometimes found in converts to a religious creed,
is often attributed, not without plausibility (even though
erroneously in the particular case), to some flaw in the
completeness of their certitude, which interferes with
the harmony and repose of their convictions.
</p>

<p>
(5.) Again, this intellectual anxiety, which is incompatible
with certitude, shows itself in our running back
in our minds to the arguments on which we came to
believe, in not letting our conclusions alone, in going
over and strengthening the evidence, and, as it were,
getting it by heart, as if our highest assent were only
an inference. And such too is our unnecessarily declaring
that we are certain, as if to reassure ourselves,
and our appealing to others for their suffrage in behalf
of the truths of which we are so sure; which is like our
asking another whether we are weary and hungry, or
have eaten and drunk to our satisfaction.
</p>

<p>
All laws are general; none are invariable; I am not
writing as a moralist or casuist. It must ever be recollected
that these various phenomena of mind, though
signs, are not infallible signs of uncertitude; they may
proceed, in the particular case, from other circumstances.
Such anxieties and alarms may be merely emotional and
from the imagination, not intellectual; parallel to the
beating of the heart, nay, as I have been told, the
trembling of the limbs, of even the bravest men, before
a battle, when standing still to receive the first attack
of the enemy. Such too is that palpitating self-interrogation,
that trouble of the mind lest it should not
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
believe strongly enough, which, and not doubt, underlies
the sensitiveness described in the well-known
lines,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>With eyes too tremblingly awake,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>To bear with dimness for His sake.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And so again, a man's over-earnestness in argument
may arise from zeal or charity; his impatience from
loyalty to the truth; his extravagance from want of taste,
from enthusiasm, or from youthful ardour; and his restless
recurrence to argument, not from personal disquiet,
but from a vivid appreciation of the controversial talent
of an opponent, or of his own, or of the mere philosophical
difficulties of the subject in dispute. These are
points for the consideration of those who are concerned
in registering and explaining what may be called the
meteorological phenomena of the human mind, and do
not interfere with the broad principle which I would lay
down, that to fear argument is to doubt the conclusion,
and to be certain of a truth is to be careless of objections
to it;&mdash;nor with the practical rule, that mere assent is
not certitude, and must not be confused with it.
</p>

<p>
2. Now to consider what Certitude positively is, as a
matter of experience.
</p>

<p>
It is accompanied, as a state of mind, by a specific
feeling, proper to it, and discriminating it from other
states, intellectual and moral, I do not say, as its practical
test or as its <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>differentia</foreign>,
but as its token, and in a
certain sense its form. When a man says he is certain,
he means he is conscious to himself of having this specific
feeling. It is a feeling of satisfaction and self-gratulation,
of intellectual security, arising out of a sense
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
of success, attainment, possession, finality, as regards the
matter which has been in question. As a conscientious
deed is attended by a self-approval which nothing but
itself can create, so certitude is united to a sentiment
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sui
generis</foreign> in which it lives and is manifested. These two
parallel sentiments indeed have no relationship with
each other, the enjoyable self-repose of certitude being
as foreign to a good deed, as the self-approving glow of
conscience is to the perception of a truth; yet knowledge,
as well as virtue, is an end, and both knowledge and
virtue, when reflected on, carry with them respectively
their own reward in the characteristic sentiment, which,
as I have said, is proper to each. And, as the performance
of what is right is distinguished by this religious
peace, so the attainment of what is true is attested by
this intellectual security.
</p>

<p>
And, as the feeling of self-approbation, which is
proper to good conduct, does not belong to the sense or
to the possession of the beautiful or of the becoming, of
the pleasant or of the useful, so neither is the special
relaxation and repose of mind, which is the token of
Certitude, ever found to attend upon simple Assent, on
processes of Inference, or on Doubt; nor on investigation,
conjecture, opinion, as such, or on any other state
or action of mind, besides Certitude. On the contrary,
those acts and states of mind have gratifications proper
to themselves, and unlike that of Certitude, as will sufficiently
appear on considering them separately.
</p>

<p>
(1.) Philosophers are fond of enlarging on the pleasures
of Knowledge, (that is, Knowledge as such,) nor need I
here prove that such pleasures exist; but the repose in
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
self and in its object, as connected with self, which I
attribute to Certitude, does not attach to mere knowing,
that is, to the perception of things, but to the consciousness
of having that knowledge. The simple and direct perception
of things has its own great satisfaction; but it
must recognize them as realities, and recognize them as
known, before it becomes the perception and has the
satisfaction of certitude. Indeed, as far as I see, the
pleasure of perceiving truth without reflecting on it as
truth, is not very different, except in intensity and in
dignity, from the pleasure, as such, of assent or belief
given to what is not true, nay, from the pleasure of the
mere passive reception of recitals or narratives, which
neither profess to be true nor claim to be believed.
Representations of any kind are in their own nature
pleasurable, whether they be true or not, whether they
come to us, or do not come, as true. We read a history,
or a biographical notice, with pleasure; and we read a
romance with pleasure; and a pleasure which is quite
apart from the question of fact or fiction. Indeed, when
we would persuade young people to read history, we tell
them that it is as interesting as a romance or a novel.
The mere acquisition of new images, and those images
striking, great, various, unexpected, beautiful, with
mutual relations and bearings, as being parts of a whole,
with continuity, succession, evolution, with recurring
complications and corresponding solutions, with a crisis
and a catastrophe, is highly pleasurable, quite independently
of the question whether there is any truth in them.
I am not denying that we should be baulked and disappointed
to be told they were all untrue, but this seems
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
to arise from the reflection that we have been taken in;
not as if the fact of their truth were a distinct element
of pleasure, though it would increase the pleasure, as
investing them with a character of marvellousness, and
as associating them with known or ascertained places.
But even if the pleasure of knowledge is not thus founded
on the imagination, at least it does not consist in that
triumphant repose of the mind after a struggle, which is
the characteristic of Certitude.
</p>

<p>
And so too as to such statements as gain from us a
half-assent, as superstitious tales, stories of magic, of
romantic crime, of ghosts, or such as we follow for the
moment with a faint and languid assent,&mdash;contemporary
history, political occurrences, the news of the day,&mdash;the
pleasure resulting from these is that of novelty or curiosity,
and is like the pleasure arising from the excitement of
chance and from variety; it has in it no sense of possession:
it is simply external to us, and has nothing akin
to the thought of a battle and a victory.
</p>

<p>
(2.) Again, the Pursuit of knowledge has its own
pleasure,&mdash;as distinct from the pleasures of knowledge, as
it is distinct from that of consciously possessing it. This
will be evident at once, if we consider what a vacuity
and depression of mind sometimes comes upon us on the
termination of an inquiry, however successfully terminated,
compared with the interest and spirit with which
we carried it on. The pleasure of a search, like that of
a hunt, lies in the searching, and ends at the point at
which the pleasure of Certitude begins. Its elements are
altogether foreign to those which go to compose the
serene satisfaction of Certitude. First, the successive
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
steps of discovery, which attend on an investigation,
are continual and ever-extending informations, and
pleasurable, not only as such, but also as the evidence
of past efforts, and the earnest of success at the last.
Next, there is the interest which attaches to a mystery,
not yet removed, but tending to removal,&mdash;the complex
pleasure of wonder, expectation, sudden surprises, suspense,
and hope, of advances fitful, yet sure, to the
unknown. And there is the pleasure which attaches to
the toil and conflict of the strong, the consciousness and
successive evidences of power, moral and intellectual, the
pride of ingenuity and skill, of industry, patience, vigilance,
and perseverance.
</p>

<p>
Such are the pleasures of investigation and discovery;
and to these we must add, what I have suggested in the
last sentence, the logical satisfaction, as it may be called,
which accompanies these efforts of mind. There is great
pleasure, as is plain, at least to certain minds, in proceeding
from particular facts to principles, in generalizing,
discriminating, reducing into order and meaning
the maze of phenomena which nature presents to us. This
is the kind of pleasure attendant on the treatment of
probabilities which point at conclusions without reaching
them, or of objections which must be weighed and
measured, and adjusted for what they are worth, over
and against propositions which are antecedently evident.
It is the special pleasure belonging to Inference as
contrasted with Assent, a pleasure almost poetical, as
twilight has more poetry in it than noon-day. Such is
the joy of the pleader, with a good case in hand, and
expecting the separate attacks of half a dozen acute
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
intellects, each advancing from a point of his own. I
suppose this was the pleasure which the Academics had
in mind, when they propounded that happiness lay, not
in finding the truth, but in seeking it. To seek, indeed,
with the certainty of not finding what we seek, cannot
in any serious matter, be pleasurable, any more than the
labour of Sisyphus or the Danaides; but when the result
does not concern us very much, clever arguments and
rival ones have the attraction of a game of chance or
skill, whether or not they lead to any definite conclusion.
</p>

<p>
(3.) Are there pleasures of Doubt, as well as of Inference
and of Assent? In one sense, there are. Not indeed, if
doubt simply means ignorance, uncertainty, or hopeless
suspense; but there is a certain grave acquiescence in
ignorance, a recognition of our impotence to solve momentous
and urgent questions, which has a satisfaction
of its own. After high aspirations, after renewed endeavours,
after bootless toil, after long wanderings, after
hope, effort, weariness, failure, painfully alternating and
recurring, it is an immense relief to the exhausted mind
to be able to say, <q>At length I know that I can know
nothing about any thing,</q>&mdash;that is, while it can maintain
itself in a posture of thought which has no promise
of permanence, because it is unnatural. But here the
satisfaction does not lie in not knowing, but in knowing
there is nothing to know. It is a positive act of assent
or conviction, given to what in the particular case is an
untruth. It is the assent and the false certitude which
are the cause of the tranquillity of mind. Ignorance
remains the evil which it ever was, but something of
the peace of Certitude is gained in knowing the worst,
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
and in having reconciled the mind to the endurance
of it.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I may seem to have been needlessly diffuse in thus
dwelling on the pleasurable affections severally attending
on these various conditions of the intellect, but I have
had a purpose in doing so. That Certitude is a natural
and normal state of mind, and not (as is sometimes objected)
one of its extravagances or infirmities, is proved
indeed by the remarks which I have made above on the
same objection, as directed against Assent; for Certitude
is only one of its forms. But I have thought it well in
addition to suggest, even at the expense of a digression,
that as no one would refuse to Inquiry, Doubt, and
Knowledge a legitimate place among our mental constituents,
so no one can reasonably ignore a state of
mind which not only is shown to be substantive by
possessing a sentiment <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sui generis</foreign>
and characteristic, but
is analogical to Inquiry, Doubt, and Knowledge, in the
fact of its thus having a sentiment of its own.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Certitude.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 1. Assent and Certitude Contrasted.</head>

<p>
In proceeding to compare together simple assent and
complex, that is, Assent and Certitude, I begin by
observing, that popularly no distinction is made between
the two; or rather, that in religious teaching that is
called Certitude to which I have given the name of
Assent. I have no difficulty in adopting such a use of
the words, though the course of my investigation has led
me to another. Perhaps religious assent may be fitly
called, to use a theological term, <q>material certitude;</q>
and the first point of comparison which I shall make
between the two states of mind, will serve to set me
right with the common way of speaking.
</p>

<p>
1. It certainly follows then, from the distinctions
which I have made, that great numbers of men must
be considered to pass through life with neither doubt
nor, on the other hand, certitude (as I have used the
words) on the most important propositions which can
occupy their minds, but with only a simple assent, that
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
is, an assent which they barely recognize, or bring home
to their consciousness or reflect upon, as being assent.
Such an assent is all that religious Protestants commonly
have to show, who believe nevertheless with
their whole hearts the contents of Holy Scripture.
Such too is the state of mind of multitudes of good
Catholics, perhaps the majority, who live and die in a
simple, full, firm belief in all that the Church teaches,
because she teaches it,&mdash;in the belief of the irreversible
truth of whatever she defines and declares,&mdash;but who,
as being far removed from Protestant and other dissentients,
and having but little intellectual training,
have never had the temptation to doubt, and never the
opportunity to be certain. There were whole nations in
the middle ages thus steeped in the Catholic Faith, who
never used its doctrines as matter for argument or research,
or changed the original belief of their childhood
into the more scientific convictions of philosophy. As
there is a condition of mind which is characterized by
invincible ignorance, so there is another which may be
said to be possessed of invincible knowledge; and it
would be paradoxical in me to deny to such a mental
state the highest quality of religious faith,&mdash;I mean certitude.
</p>

<p>
I allow this, and therefore I will call simple assent
<emph>material</emph> certitude; or, to use a still more apposite term
for it, <emph>interpretative</emph> certitude. I call it interpretative,
signifying thereby that, though the assent in the individuals
contemplated is not a reflex act, still the
question only has to be started about the truth of the
objects of their assent, in order to elicit from them an
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
act of faith in response which will fulfil the conditions of
certitude, as I have drawn them out. As to the argumentative
process necessary for such an act, it is valid
and sufficient, if it be carried out seriously, and proportionate
to their several capacities:&mdash;<q>The Catholic
Religion is true, because its objects, as present to my
mind, control and influence my conduct as nothing else
does;</q> or <q>because it has about it an odour of truth and
sanctity <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sui generis</foreign>,
as perceptible to my moral nature as
flowers to my sense, such as can only come from heaven;</q>
or <q>because it has never been to me any thing but
peace, joy, consolation, and strength, all through my
troubled life.</q> And if the particular argument used in
some instances needs strengthening, then let it be
observed, that the keenness of the real apprehension with
which the assent is made, though it cannot be the
legitimate basis of the assent, may still legitimately act,
and strongly act, in confirmation. Such, I say, would
be the promptitude and effectiveness of the reasoning,
and the facility of the change from assent to certitude
proper, in the case of the multitudes in question, did the
occasion for reflection occur; but it does not occur; and
accordingly, most genuine and thorough as is the
assent, it can only be called virtual, material, or interpretative
certitude, if I have above explained certitude
rightly.
</p>

<p>
Of course these remarks hold good in secular subjects
as well as religious:&mdash;I believe, for instance, that I am
living in an island, that Julius Cæsar once invaded it,
that it has been conquered by successive races, that it
has had great political and social changes, and that at
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
this time it has colonies, establishments, and imperial
dominion all over the earth. All this I am accustomed
to take for granted without a thought; but, were the
need to arise, I should not find much difficulty in drawing
out from my own mental resources reasons sufficient to
justify me in these beliefs.
</p>

<p>
It is true indeed that, among the multitudes who are
thus implicitly certain, there may be those who would
change their assents, did they seek to place them upon
an argumentative footing; for instance, some believers
in Christianity, did they examine into its claims, might
end in renouncing it. But this is only saying that there
are genuine assents, and assents that ultimately prove to
be not genuine; and again, that there is an assent which
is not a virtual certitude, and is lost in the attempt to
make it certitude. And of course we are not gifted
with that insight into the minds of individuals, which
enables us to determine before the event, when it is that
an assent is really such, and when not, or not a deeply
rooted assent. Men may assent lightly, or from mere
prejudice, or without understanding what it is to which
they assent. They may be genuine believers in
Revelation up to the time when they begin formally to
examine,&mdash;nay, and really have implicit reasons for their
belief,&mdash;and then, being overcome by the number of
views which they have to confront, and swayed by the
urgency of special objections, or biassed by their
imaginations, or frightened by a deeper insight into the
claims of religion upon the soul, may, in spite of their
habitual and latent grounds for believing, shrink back
and withdraw their assent. Or again, they may once
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
have believed, but their assent has gradually become a
mere profession, without their knowing it; then, when
by accident they interrogate themselves, they find no
assent within them at all, to turn into certitude. The
event, I say, alone determines whether what is outwardly
an assent is really such an act of the mind as admits of
being developed into certitude, or is a mere self-delusion
or a cloak for unbelief.
</p>

<p>
2. Next, I observe, that, of the two modes of apprehending
propositions, notional and real, assent, as I
have already said, has closer relations with real than
with notional. Now a simple assent need not be
notional; but the reflex or confirmatory assent of certitude
always is given to a notional proposition, viz. to
the truth, necessity, duty, &amp;c., of our assent to the
simple assent and to its proposition. Its predicate is a
general term, and cannot stand for a fact, whereas the
original proposition, included in it, may, and often does,
express a fact. Thus, <q>The cholera is in the midst of
us</q> is a real proposition; but <q>That <q>the cholera is in
the midst of us</q> is beyond all doubt</q> is a notional.
Now assent to a real proposition is assent to an imagination,
and an imagination, as supplying objects to our
emotional and moral nature, is adapted to be a principle
of action: accordingly, the simple assent to <q>The cholera
is among us,</q> is more emphatic and operative, than the
confirmatory assent, <q>It is beyond reasonable doubt that
<q>the cholera is among us.</q></q> The confirmation gives
momentum to the complex act of the mind, but the
simple assent gives it its edge. The simple assent would
still be operative in its measure, though the reflex assent
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
was, not <q>It is undeniable,</q> but <q>It is probable</q> that
<q>the cholera is among us;</q> whereas there would be no
operative force in the mental act at all, though the
reflex assent was to the truth, not to the probability of
the fact, if the fact which was the object of the simple
assent was nothing more than <q>The cholera is in China.</q>
The reflex assent then, which is the characteristic of
certitude, does not immediately touch us; it is purely
intellectual, and, taken by itself, has scarcely more force
than the recording of a conclusion.
</p>

<p>
I have taken an instance, in which the matter which
is submitted for examination and for assent, can hardly
fail of being interesting to the minds employed upon it;
but in many cases, even though the fact assented-to has
a bearing upon action, it is not directly of a nature to
influence the feelings or conduct, except of particular
persons. And in such instances of certitude, the
previous labour of coming to a conclusion, and that
repose of mind which I have above described as attendant
on an assent to its truth, often counteracts whatever of
lively sensation the fact thus concluded is in itself
adapted to excite; so that what is gained in depth and
exactness of belief is lost as regards freshness and vigour.
Hence it is that literary or scientific men, who may have
investigated some difficult point of history, philosophy,
or physics, and have come to their own settled conclusion
about it, having had a perfect right to form one, are far
more disposed to be silent as to their convictions, and to
let others alone, than partisans on either side of the
question, who take it up with less thought and seriousness.
And so again, in the religious world, no one seems
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
to look for any great devotion or fervour in controversialists,
writers on Christian Evidences, theologians,
and the like, it being taken for granted, rightly or
wrongly, that such men are too intellectual to be
spiritual, and are more occupied with the truth of doctrine
than with its reality. If, on the other hand, we
would see what the force of simple assent can be, viewed
apart from its reflex confirmation, we have but to look at
the generous and uncalculating energy of faith as
exemplified in the primitive Martyrs, in the youths who
defied the pagan tyrant, or the maidens who were silent
under his tortures. It is assent, pure and simple, which
is the motive cause of great achievements; it is a
confidence, growing out of instincts rather than arguments,
stayed upon a vivid apprehension, and animated
by a transcendent logic, more concentrated in will and in
deed for the very reason that it has not been subjected to
any intellectual development.
</p>

<p>
It must be borne in mind, that, in thus speaking, I
am contrasting with each other the simple and the
reflex assent, which together make up the complex act
of certitude. In its complete exhibition keenness in
believing is united with repose and persistence.
</p>

<p>
3. We must take the constitution of the human mind
as we find it, and not as we may judge it ought to be;&mdash;thus
I am led on to another remark, which is at first
sight disadvantageous to Certitude. Introspection of our
intellectual operations is not the best of means for preserving
us from intellectual hesitations. To meddle with
the springs of thought and action is really to weaken
them; and, as to that argumentation which is the preliminary
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
to Certitude, it may indeed be unavoidable, but,
as in the case of other serviceable allies, it is not so easy
to discard it, after it has done its work, as it was in
the first instance to obtain its assistance. Questioning,
when encouraged on any subject-matter, readily becomes
a habit, and leads the mind to substitute exercises of
inference for assent, whether simple or complex. Reasons
for assenting suggest reasons for not assenting, and
what were realities to our imagination, while our assent
was simple, may become little more than notions, when
we have attained to certitude. Objections and difficulties
tell upon the mind; it may lose its elasticity, and be
unable to throw them off. And thus, even as regards
things which it may be absurd to doubt, we may, in
consequence of some past suggestion of the possibility of
error, or of some chance association to their disadvantage,
be teazed from time to time and hampered by involuntary
questionings, as if we were not certain, when we
are. Nay, there are those, who are visited with these
even permanently, as a sort of
<foreign rend='italic'>muscæ volitantes</foreign> of their
mental vision, ever flitting to and fro, and dimming
its clearness and completeness&mdash;visitants, for which they
are not responsible, and which they know to be unreal,
still so seriously interfering with their comfort and even
with their energy, that they may be tempted to complain
that even blind prejudice has more of quiet and of
durability than certitude.
</p>

<p>
As even Saints may suffer from imaginations in which
they have no part, so the shreds and tatters of former
controversies, and the litter of an argumentative habit,
may beset and obstruct the intellect,&mdash;questions which
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
have been solved without their solutions, chains of reasoning
with missing links, difficulties which have their roots
in the nature of things, and which are necessarily left
behind in a philosophical inquiry because they cannot be
removed, and which call for the exercise of good sense
and for strength of will to put them down with a high
hand, as irrational or preposterous. Whence comes evil?
why are we created without our consent? how can the
Supreme Being have no beginning? how can He need
skill, if He is omnipotent? if He is omnipotent, why
does He permit suffering? If He permits suffering, how
is He all-loving? if He is all-loving, how can He be
just? if He is infinite, what has He to do with the
finite? how can the temporary be decisive of the eternal?&mdash;these,
and a host of like questions, must arise in
every thoughtful mind, and, after the best use of reason,
must be deliberately put aside, as beyond reason, as (so
to speak) no-thoroughfares, which, having no outlet
themselves, have no legitimate power to divert us from
the King's highway, and to hinder the direct course of
religious inquiry from reaching its destination. A
serious obstruction, however, they will be now and then
to particular minds, enfeebling the faith which they
cannot destroy,&mdash;being parallel to the uncomfortable,
associations with which sometimes we regard one whom
we have fallen-in with, acquaintance or stranger, arising
from some chance word, look, or action of his which we
have witnessed, and which prejudices him in our imagination,
though we are angry with ourselves that it
should do so.
</p>

<p>
Again, when, in confidence of our own certitude, and
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
with a view to philosophical fairness, we have attempted
successfully to throw ourselves out of our habits of belief
into a simply dispassionate frame of mind, then vague
antecedent improbabilities, or what seem to us as such,&mdash;merely
what is strange or marvellous in certain truths,
merely the fact that things happen in one way and not
in another, when they must happen in some way,&mdash;may
disturb us, as suggesting to us, <q>Is it possible? who
would have thought it! what a coincidence!</q> without
really touching the deep assent of our whole intellectual
being to the object, whatever it be, thus irrationally
assailed. Thus we may wonder at the Divine Mercy of
the Incarnation, till we grow startled at it, and ask why
the earth has so special a theological history, or why we
are Christians and others not, or how God can really
exert a particular governance, since He does not punish
such sinners as we are, thus seeming to doubt His
power or His equity, though in truth we are not doubting
at all.
</p>

<p>
The occasion of this intellectual waywardness may be
slighter still. I gaze on the Palatine Hill, or on the
Parthenon, or on the Pyramids, which I have read of
from a boy, or upon the matter-of-fact reality of the
sacred places in the Holy Land, and I have to force my
imagination to follow the guidance of sight and of
reason. It is to me so strange that a lifelong belief
should be changed into sight, and things should be
so near me, which hitherto had been visions. And
so in times, first of suspense, then of joy; <q>When the
Lord turned the captivity of Sion, then</q> (according to
the Hebrew text) <q>we were like unto them that dream.</q>
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
Yet it was a dream which they were certain was a truth,
while they seemed to doubt it. So, too, was it in some
sense with the Apostles after our Lord's resurrection.
</p>

<p>
Such vague thoughts, haunting or evanescent, are in
no sense akin to that struggle between faith and unbelief,
which made the poor father cry out, <q>I believe, help
Thou mine unbelief!</q> Nay, even what in some minds
seems like an undercurrent of scepticism, or a faith
founded on a perilous substratum of doubt, need not be
more than a temptation, though robbing Certitude of its
normal peacefulness. In such a case, faith may still
express the steady conviction of the intellect; it may
still be the grave, deep, calm, prudent assurance of
mature experience, though it is not the ready and impetuous
assent of the young, the generous, or the
unreflecting.
</p>

<p>
4. There is another characteristic of Certitude, in
contrast with Assent, which it is important to insist
upon, and that is, its persistence. Assents may and do
change; certitudes endure. This is why religion demands
more than an assent to its truth; it requires a certitude,
or at least an assent which is convertible into certitude
on demand. Without certitude in religious faith there
may be much decency of profession and of observance,
but there can be no habit of prayer, no directness of
devotion, no intercourse with the unseen, no generosity
of self-sacrifice. Certitude then is essential to the
Christian; and if he is to persevere to the end, his
certitude must include in it a principle of persistence.
This it has; as I shall explain in the next Section.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 2. Indefectibility of Certitude.</head>

<p>
It is the characteristic of certitude that its object is a
truth, a truth as such, a proposition as true. There are
right and wrong convictions, and certitude is a right
conviction; if it is not right with a consciousness of
being right, it is not certitude. Now truth cannot
change; what is once truth is always truth; and the
human mind is made for truth, and so rests in truth, as
it cannot rest in falsehood. When then it once becomes
possessed of a truth, what is to dispossess it? but this is
to be certain; therefore once certitude, always certitude.
If certitude in any matter be the termination of all doubt
or fear about its truth, and an unconditional conscious
adherence to it, it carries with it an inward assurance,
strong though implicit, that it shall never fail. Indefectibility
almost enters into its very idea, enters into it
at least so far as this, that its failure, if of frequent
occurrence, would prove that certitude was after all and
in fact an impossible act, and that what looked like it
was a mere extravagance of the intellect. Truth would
still be truth, but the knowledge of it would be beyond
us and unattainable. It is of great importance then to
show, that, as a general rule, certitude does not fail; that
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
failures of what was taken for certitude are the exception;
that the intellect, which is made for truth, can attain
truth, and, having attained it, can keep it, can recognize
it, and preserve the recognition.
</p>

<p>
This is on the whole reasonable; yet are the stipulations,
thus obviously necessary for an act or state of
certitude, ever fulfilled? We know what conjecture is,
and what opinion, and what assent is, can we point out
any specific state or habit of thought, of which the distinguishing
mark is unchangeableness? On the contrary,
any conviction, false as well as true, may last; and
any conviction, true as well as false, may be lost. A
conviction in favour of a proposition may be exchanged
for a conviction of its contradictory; and each of them
may be attended, while they last, by that sense of security
and repose, which a true object alone can legitimately
impart. No line can be drawn between such real certitudes
as have truth for their object, and apparent certitudes.
No distinct test can be named, sufficient to
discriminate between what may be called the false
prophet and the true. What looks like certitude always
is exposed to the chance of turning out to be a mistake.
If our intimate, deliberate conviction may be counterfeit
in the case of one proposition, why not in the case of
another? if in the case of one man, why not in the case
of a hundred? Is certitude then ever possible without
the attendant gift of infallibility? can we know what is
right in one case, unless we are secured against error in
any? Further, if one man is infallible, why is he different
from his brethren? unless indeed he is distinctly marked
out for the prerogative. Must not all men be infallible
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
by consequence, if any man is to be considered as
certain?
</p>

<p>
The difficulty, thus stated argumentatively, has only
too accurate a response in what actually goes on in the
world. It is a fact of daily occurrence that men change
their certitudes, that is, what they consider to be such,
and are as confident and well-established in their new
opinions as they were once in their old. They take up
forms of religion only to leave them for their contradictories.
They risk their fortunes and their lives on
impossible adventures. They commit themselves by word
and deed, in reputation and position, to schemes which
in the event they bitterly repent of and renounce; they
set out in youth with intemperate confidence in prospects
which fail them, and in friends who betray them, ere
they come to middle age; and they end their days in
cynical disbelief of truth and virtue any where;&mdash;and
often, the more absurd are their means and their ends, so
much the longer do they cling to them, and then again
so much the more passionate is their eventual disgust
and contempt of them. How then can certitude be
theirs, how is certitude possible at all, considering it is
so often misplaced, so often fickle and inconsistent, so
deficient in available criteria? And, as to the feeling of
finality and security, ought it ever to be indulged? Is
it not a mere weakness or extravagance, a deceit, to be
eschewed by every clear and prudent mind? With the
countless instances, on all sides of us, of human fallibility,
with the constant exhibitions of antagonist certitudes,
who can so sin against modesty and sobriety of mind, as
not to be content with probability, as the true guide of
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
life, renouncing ambitious thoughts, which are sure
either to delude him, or to disappoint?
</p>

<p>
This is what may be objected: now let us see what
can be said in answer, particularly as regards religious
certitude.
</p>

<p>
1.
</p>

<p>
First, as to fallibility and infallibility. It is very
common, doubtless, especially in religious controversy,
to confuse infallibility with certitude, and to argue that,
since we have not the one, we have not the other, for that
no one can claim to be certain on any point, who is not
infallible about all; but the two words stand for things
quite distinct from each other. For example, I remember
for certain what I did yesterday, but still my memory
is not infallible; I am quite clear that two and two
makes four, but I often make mistakes in long addition
sums. I have no doubt whatever that John or Richard
is my true friend, but I have before now trusted those who
failed me, and I may do so again before I die. A certitude
is directed to this or that particular proposition; it
is not a faculty or gift, but a disposition of mind relatively
to a definite case which is before me. Infallibility,
on the contrary, is just that which certitude is not;
it is a faculty or gift, and relates, not to some one truth
in particular, but to all possible propositions in a given
subject-matter. We ought in strict propriety, to speak,
not of infallible acts, but of acts of infallibility. A belief
or opinion as little admits of being called infallible, as a
deed can correctly be called immortal. A deed is done
and over; it may be great, momentous, effective, anything
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
but immortal; it is its fame, it is the work which
it brings to pass, which is immortal, not the deed itself.
And as a deed is good or bad, but never immortal, so a
belief, opinion, or certitude is true or false, but never
infallible. We cannot speak of things which exist or
things which once were, as if they were something <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
posse</foreign>. It is persons and rules that are infallible, not
what is brought out into act, or committed to paper. A
man is infallible, whose words are always true; a rule is
infallible, if it is unerring in all its possible applications.
An infallible authority is certain in every particular case
that may arise; but a man who is certain in some one
definite case, is not on that account infallible.
</p>

<p>
I am quite certain that Victoria is our Sovereign, and
not her father, the late Duke of Kent, without laying
any claim to the gift of infallibility; as I may do a
virtuous action, without being impeccable. I may be
certain that the Church is infallible, while I am myself
a fallible mortal; otherwise, I cannot be certain that
the Supreme Being is infallible, until I am infallible
myself. It is a strange objection, then, which is sometimes
urged against Catholics, that they cannot prove
and assent to the Church's infallibility, unless they first
believe in their own. Certitude, as I have said, is
directed to one or other definite concrete proposition. I
am certain of proposition one, two, three, four, or five,
one by one, each by itself. I may be certain of one of
them, without being certain of the rest; that I am certain
of the first makes it neither likely nor unlikely that
I am certain of the second; but were I infallible, then I
should be certain, not only of one of them, but of all,
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
and of many more besides, which have never come before
me as yet. Therefore we may be certain of the infallibility
of the Church, while we admit that in many things we
are not, and cannot be, certain at all.
</p>

<p>
It is wonderful that a clear-headed man, like Chillingworth,
sees this as little as the run of every-day objectors
to the Catholic religion; for in his celebrated
<q>Religion of Protestants</q> he writes as follows:&mdash;<q>You
tell me they cannot be saved, unless they believe in your
proposals with an infallible faith. To which end they
must believe also your propounder, the Church, to be
simply infallible. Now how is it possible for them to
give a rational assent to the Church's infallibility, <emph>unless
they have some infallible means to know that she is infallible</emph>?
Neither can they infallibly know the infallibility
of this means, but by some other; and so on for ever,
unless they can dig so deep, as to come at length to the
Rock, that is, to settle all upon something evident of
itself, which is not so much as pretended.<note place='foot'>ii. n. 154.
<hi rend='italic'>Vide</hi> Note at the end of the volume.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
Now what is an <q>infallible means</q>? It is a means
of coming at a fact without the chance of mistake. It
is a proof which is sufficient for certitude in the particular
case, or a proof that is certain. When then Chillingworth
says that there can be no <q>rational assent to
the Church's infallibility</q> without <q>some infallible
means of knowing that she is infallible,</q> he means
nothing else than some means which is certain; he says
that for a rational assent to infallibility there must be an
absolutely valid or certain proof. This is intelligible;
but observe how his argument will run, if worded
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
according to this interpretation: <q>The doctrine of the
Church's infallibility requires a proof that is certain;
and that certain proof requires another previous certain
proof, and that again another, and so on
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad infinitum</foreign>,
unless indeed we dig so deep as to settle all upon something
evident of itself.</q> What is this but to say that
nothing in this world is certain but what is self-evident?
that nothing can be absolutely proved? Can he really
mean this? What then becomes of physical truth? of
the discoveries in optics, chemistry, and electricity, or
of the science of motion? Intuition by itself will carry
us but a little way into that circle of knowledge which
is the boast of the present age.
</p>

<p>
I can believe then in the infallible Church without
my own personal infallibility. Certitude is at most
nothing more than infallibility <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pro
hac vice</foreign>, and promises
nothing as to the truth of any proposition beside its
own. That I am certain of this proposition to-day, is
no ground for thinking that I shall have a right to be
certain of that proposition to-morrow; and that I am
wrong in my convictions about to-day's proposition,
does not hinder my having a true conviction, a genuine
certitude, about to-morrow's proposition. If indeed I
claimed to be infallible, one failure would shiver my
claim to pieces; but I may claim to be certain of the
truth to which I have already attained, though I should
arrive at no new truths in addition as long as I
live.
</p>

<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>

<p>
2.
</p>

<p>
Let us put aside the word <q>infallibility;</q> let us
understand by certitude, as I have explained it, nothing
more than a relation of the mind towards given propositions:&mdash;still,
it may be urged, it involves a sense of
security and of repose, at least as regards these in particular.
Now how can this security be mine,&mdash;without
which certitude is not,&mdash;if I know, as I know too well,
that before now I have thought myself certain, when I
was certain after all of an untruth? Is not the very
possibility of certitude lost to me for ever by that one
mistake? What happened once, may happen again.
All my certitudes before and after are henceforth destroyed
by the introduction of a reasonable doubt, underlying
them all. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ipso facto</foreign>
they cease to be certitudes,&mdash;they
come short of unconditional assents by the measure
of that counterfeit assurance. They are nothing more
to me than opinions or anticipations, judgments on the
verisimilitude of intellectual views, not the possession
and enjoyment of truths. And who has not thus been
balked by false certitudes a hundred times in the course
of his experience? and how can certitude have a legitimate
place in our mental constitution, when it thus
manifestly ministers to error and to scepticism?
</p>

<p>
This is what may be objected, and it is not, as I think,
difficult to answer. Certainly, the experience of mistakes
in the assents which we have made are to the prejudice of
subsequent ones. There is an antecedent difficulty in our
allowing ourselves to be certain of something to-day, if
yesterday we had to give up our belief of something else,
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
of which we had up to that time professed ourselves to
be certain. This is true; but antecedent objections to an
act are not sufficient of themselves to prohibit its exercise;
they may demand of us an increased circumspection
before committing ourselves to it, but may be met with
reasons more than sufficient to overcome them.
</p>

<p>
It must be recollected that certitude is a deliberate
assent given expressly after reasoning. If then my certitude
is unfounded, it is the reasoning that is in fault,
not my assent to it. It is the law of my mind to seal
up the conclusions to which ratiocination has brought
me, by that formal assent which I have called a certitude.
I could indeed have withheld my assent, but I
should have acted against my nature, had I done so when
there was what I considered a proof; and I did only
what was fitting, what was incumbent on me, upon those
existing conditions, in giving it. This is the process by
which knowledge accumulates and is stored up both in
the individual and in the world. It has sometimes been
remarked, when men have boasted of the knowledge of
modern times, that no wonder we see more than the
ancients, because we are mounted upon their shoulders.
The conclusions of one generation are the truths of the
next. We are able, it is our duty, deliberately to take
things for granted which our forefathers had a duty to
doubt about; and unless we summarily put down disputation
on points which have been already proved and
ruled, we shall waste our time, and make no advances.
Circumstances indeed may arise, when a question may
legitimately be revived, which has already been definitely
determined; but a re-consideration of such a question
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
need not abruptly unsettle the existing certitude of those
who engage in it, or throw them into a scepticism about
things in general, even though eventually they find they
have been wrong in a particular matter. It would have
been absurd to prohibit the controversy which has lately
been held concerning the obligations of Newton to Pascal;
and supposing it had issued in their being established,
the partisans of Newton would not have thought it necessary
to renounce their certitude of the law of gravitation
itself, on the ground that they had been mistaken
in their certitude that Newton discovered it.
</p>

<p>
If we are never to be certain, after having been once
certain wrongly, then we ought never to attempt a
proof because we have once made a bad one. Errors in
reasoning are lessons and warnings, not to give up
reasoning, but to reason with greater caution. It is
absurd to break up the whole structure of our knowledge,
which is the glory of the human intellect, because the
intellect is not infallible in its conclusions. If in any particular
case we have been mistaken in our inferences and
the certitudes which followed upon them, we are bound
of course to take the fact of this mistake into account, in
making up our minds on any new question, before we
proceed to decide upon it. But if, while weighing the
arguments on one side and the other and drawing our
conclusion, that old mistake has already been allowed
for, or has been, to use a familiar mode of speaking, discounted,
then it has no outstanding claim against our
acceptance of that conclusion, after it has actually been
drawn. Whatever be the legitimate weight of the fact
of that mistake in our inquiry, justice has been done to
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
it, before we have allowed ourselves to be certain again.
Suppose I am walking out in the moonlight, and see
dimly the outlines of some figure among the trees;&mdash;it is
a man. I draw nearer,&mdash;it is still a man; nearer still,
and all hesitation is at an end,&mdash;I am certain it is a man.
But he neither moves, nor speaks when I address him;
and then I ask myself what can be his purpose in hiding
among the trees at such an hour. I come quite close to
him, and put out my arm. Then I find for certain that
what I took for a man is but a singular shadow, formed
by the falling of the moonlight on the interstices of some
branches or their foliage. Am I not to indulge my
second certitude, because I was wrong in my first? does
not any objection, which lies against my second from the
failure of my first, fade away before the evidence on
which my second is founded?
</p>

<p>
Or again: I depose on my oath in a court of justice,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, that I was robbed
by the prisoner at the bar. Then, when the real offender
is brought before me, I am obliged, to my great confusion,
to retract. Because I have been mistaken in my
certitude, may I not at least be certain that I have been
mistaken? And further, in spite of the shock which
that mistake gives me, is it impossible that the sight of
the real culprit may give me so luminous a conviction
that at length I have got the right man, that, were it
decent towards the court, or consistent with self-respect,
I may find myself prepared to swear to the identity of
the second, as I have already solemnly committed myself
to the identity of the first? It is manifest that the two
certitudes stand each on its own basis, and the antecedent
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
objection to the admission of a truth which was brought
home to me second, drawn from a hallucination which
came first, is a mere abstract argument, impotent when
directed against good evidence lying in the concrete.
</p>

<p>
3.
</p>

<p>
If in the criminal case which I have been supposing,
the second certitude, felt by a witness, was a legitimate
state of mind, so was the first. An act, viewed in itself,
is not wrong, because it is done wrongly. False certitudes
are faults because they are false, not because they
are (so-called) certitudes. They are, or may be, the
attempts and the failures of an intellect insufficiently
trained, or off its guard. Assent is an act of the mind,
congenial to its nature; and it, as other acts, may be
made both when it ought to be made, and when it
ought not. It is a free act, a personal act for which
the doer is responsible, and the actual mistakes in
making it, be they ever so numerous or serious, have no
force whatever to prohibit the act itself. We are accustomed
in such cases, to appeal to the maxim, <q>Usum
non tollit abusus;</q> and it is plain that, if what may be
called functional disarrangements of the intellect are to
be considered fatal to the recognition of the functions
themselves, then the mind has no laws whatever and no
normal constitution. I just now spoke of the growth
of knowledge; there is also a growth in the use of those
faculties by which knowledge is acquired. The intellect
admits of an education; man is a being of progress; he
has to learn how to fulfil his end, and to be what facts
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
show that he is intended to be. His mind is in the first
instance in disorder, and runs wild; his faculties have
their rudimental and inchoate state, and are gradually
carried on by practice and experience to their perfection.
No instances then whatever of mistaken certitude are
sufficient to constitute a proof, that certitude itself is a
perversion or extravagance of his nature.
</p>

<p>
We do not dispense with clocks, because from time to
time they go wrong, and tell untruly. A clock, organically
considered, may be perfect, yet it may require
regulating. Till that needful work is done, the moment-hand
may mark the half-minute, when the minute-hand
is at the quarter-past, and the hour hand is just at noon,
and the quarter-bell strikes the three-quarters, and the
hour-bell strikes four, while the sun-dial precisely tells
two o'clock. The sense of certitude may be called the
bell of the intellect; and that it strikes when it should
not is a proof that the clock is out of order, no proof
that the bell will be untrustworthy and useless, when it
comes to us adjusted and regulated from the hands of the
clock-maker.
</p>

<p>
Our conscience too may be said to strike the hours,
and will strike them wrongly, unless it be duly regulated
for the performance of its proper function. It is
the loud announcement of the principle of right in the
details of conduct, as the sense of certitude is the clear
witness to what is true. Both certitude and conscience
have a place in the normal condition of the mind. As a
human being, I am unable, if I were to try, to live without
some kind of conscience; and I am as little able to
live without those landmarks of thought which certitude
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
secures for me; still, as the hammer of a clock may
tell untruly, so may my conscience and my sense of certitude
be attached to mental acts, whether of consent or
of assent, which have no claim to be thus sanctioned.
Both the moral and the intellectual sanction are liable to
be biassed by personal inclinations and motives; both
require and admit of discipline; and, as it is no disproof
of the authority of conscience that false consciences
abound, neither does it destroy the importance and the
uses of certitude, because even educated minds, who are
earnest in their inquiries after the truth, in many cases
remain under the power of prejudice or delusion.
</p>

<p>
To this deficiency in mental training a wider error is
to be attributed,&mdash;the mistaking for conviction and certitude
states and frames of mind which make no pretence
to the fundamental condition on which conviction
rests as distinct from assent. The multitude of men
confuse together the probable, the possible, and the
certain, and apply these terms to doctrines and statements
almost at random. They have no clear view
what it is they know, what they presume, what they
suppose, and what they only assert. They make little
distinction between credence, opinion, and profession;
at various times they give them all perhaps the name
of certitude, and accordingly, when they change their
minds, they fancy they have given up points of which
they had a true conviction. Or at least bystanders
thus speak of them, and the very idea of certitude falls
into disrepute.
</p>

<p>
In this day the subject-matter of thought and belief
has so increased upon us, that a far higher mental formation
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
is required than was necessary in times past,
and higher than we have actually reached. The whole
world is brought to our doors every morning, and our
judgment is required upon social concerns, books, persons,
parties, creeds, national acts, political principles
and measures. We have to form our opinion, make our
profession, take our side on a hundred matters on which
we have but little right to speak at all. But we do
speak, and must speak, upon them, though neither
we nor those who hear us are well able to determine
what is the real position of our intellect relatively to
those many questions, one by one, on which we commit
ourselves; and then, since many of these questions
change their complexion with the passing hour, and
many require elaborate consideration, and many are
simply beyond us, it is not wonderful, if, at the end of
a few years, we have to revise or to repudiate our conclusions;
and then we shall be unfairly said to have
changed our certitudes, and shall confirm the doctrine,
that, except in abstract truth, no judgment rises higher
than probability.
</p>

<p>
Such are the mistakes about certitude among educated
men; and after referring to them, it is scarcely worth
while to dwell upon the absurdities and excesses of the
rude intellect, as seen in the world at large; as if any
one could dream of treating as deliberate assents, as
assents upon assents, as convictions or certitudes, the
prejudices, credulities, infatuations, superstitions, fanaticisms,
the whims and fancies, the sudden irrevocable
plunges into the unknown, the obstinate determinations,&mdash;the
offspring, as they are, of ignorance, wilfulness,
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
cupidity, and pride,&mdash;which go so far to make up the
history of mankind; yet these are often set down as
instances of certitude and of its failure.
</p>

<p>
4.
</p>

<p>
I have spoken of certitude as being assigned a definite
and fixed place among our mental acts;&mdash;it follows upon
examination and proof, as the bell sounds the hour, when
the hands reach it,&mdash;so that no act or state of the intellect
is certitude, however it may resemble it, which does
not observe this appointed law. This proviso greatly
diminishes the catalogue of genuine certitudes. Another
restriction is this:&mdash;the occasions or subject-matters of
certitude are under law also. Putting aside the daily
exercise of the senses, the principal subjects in secular
knowledge, about which we can be certain, are the
truths or facts which are its basis. As to this world, we
are certain of the elements of knowledge, whether
general, scientific, historical, or such as bear on our
daily needs and habits, and relate to ourselves, our
homes and families, our friends, neighbourhood, country,
and civil state. Beyond these elementary points of
knowledge, lies a vast subject-matter of opinion,
credence, and belief, viz. the field of public affairs, of
social and professional life, of business, of duty, of literature,
of taste, nay, of the experimental sciences. On
subjects such as these the reasonings and conclusions of
mankind vary,&mdash;<q>mundum tradidit disputationi eorum;</q>&mdash;and
prudent men in consequence seldom speak confidently,
unless they are warranted to do so by genius,
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
great experience, or some special qualification. They
determine their judgments by what is probable, what is
safe, what promises best, what has verisimilitude, what
impresses and sways them. They neither can possess,
nor need certitude, nor do they look out for it.
</p>

<p>
Hence it is that&mdash;the province of certitude being so
contracted, and that of opinion so large&mdash;it is common to
call probability the guide of life. This saying, when
properly explained, is true; however, we must not suffer
ourselves to carry a true maxim to an extreme; it is far
from true, if we so hold it as to forget that without first
principles there can be no conclusions at all, and that
thus probability does in some sense presuppose and
require the existence of truths which are certain. Especially
is the maxim untrue, in respect to the other great
department of knowledge, if taken to support the doctrine,
that the first principles and elements of religion, which
are universally received, are mere matter of opinion;
though in this day, it is too often taken for granted that
religion is one of those subjects on which truth cannot
be discovered, and on which one conclusion is pretty
much on a level with another. But on the contrary, the
initial truths of divine knowledge ought to be viewed as
parallel to the initial truths of secular: as the latter are
certain, so too are the former. I cannot indeed deny that
a decent reverence for the Supreme Being, an acquiescence
in the claims of Revelation, a general profession of
Christian doctrine, and some sort of attendance on sacred
ordinances, is in fact all the religion that is usual with
even the better sort of men, and that for all this a sufficient
basis may certainly be found in probabilities; but
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
if religion is to be devotion, and not a mere matter of
sentiment, if it is to be made the ruling principle of our
lives, if our actions, one by one, and our daily conduct,
are to be consistently directed towards an Invisible
Being, we need something higher than a mere balance
of arguments to fix and to control our minds. Sacrifice
of wealth, name, or position, faith and hope, self-conquest,
communion with the spiritual world, presuppose
a real hold and habitual intuition of the
objects of Revelation, which is certitude under another
name.
</p>

<p>
To this issue indeed we may bring the main difference,
viewed philosophically, between nominal Christianity
on the one hand, and vital Christianity on the
other. Rational, sensible men, as they consider themselves,
men who do not comprehend the very notion of
loving God above all things, are content with such a
measure of probability for the truths of religion, as
serves them in their secular transactions; but those who
are deliberately staking their all upon the hopes of the
next world, think it reasonable, and find it necessary,
before starting on their new course, to have some points,
clear and immutable, to start from; otherwise, they will
not start at all. They ask, as a preliminary condition,
to have the ground sure under their feet; they look for
more than human reasonings and inferences, for nothing
less than the <q>strong consolation,</q> as the Apostle
speaks, of those <q>immutable things in which it is impossible
for God to lie,</q> His counsel and His oath.
Christian earnestness may be ruled by the world to be a
perverseness or a delusion; but, as long as it exists, it
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
will presuppose certitude as the very life which is to
animate it.
</p>

<p>
This is the true parallel between human and divine
knowledge; each of them opens into a large field of
mere opinion, but in both the one and the other the
primary principles, the general, fundamental, cardinal
truths are immutable. In human matters we are
guided by probabilities, but, I repeat, they are probabilities
founded on certainties. It is on no probability
that we are constantly receiving the informations and
dictates of sense and memory, of our intellectual instincts,
of the moral sense, and of the logical faculty. It
is on no probability that we receive the generalizations
of science, and the great outlines of history. These are
certain truths; and from them each of us forms his own
judgments and directs his own course, according to the
probabilities which they suggest to him, as the navigator
applies his observations and his charts for the determination
of his course. Such is the main view to be taken
of the separate provinces of probability and certainty in
matters of this world; and so, as regards the world invisible
and future, we have a direct and conscious
knowledge of our Maker, His attributes, His providences,
acts, works, and will; and, beyond this knowledge
lies the large domain of theology, metaphysics,
and ethics, on which it is not allowed to us to advance
beyond probabilities, or to attain to more than an
opinion.
</p>

<p>
Such on the whole is the analogy between our knowledge
of matters of this world and matters of the world
unseen;&mdash;indefectible certitude in primary truths, manifold
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
variations of opinion in their application and
disposition.
</p>

<p>
5.
</p>

<p>
I have said that Certitude, whether in human or divine
knowledge, is attainable as regards general and cardinal
truths; and that in neither department of knowledge,
on the whole, is certitude discredited, lost, or reversed;
for, in matter of fact, whether in human or divine,
those primary truths have ever kept their place from
the time when they first took possession of it. However,
there is one obvious objection which may be made
to this representation, and I proceed to take notice
of it.
</p>

<p>
It may be urged then, that time was when the primary
truths of science were unknown, and when in consequence
various theories were held, contrary to each
other. The first element of all things was said to be
water, to be air, to be fire; the framework of the
universe was eternal; or it was the ever-new combination
of innumerable atoms: the planets were fixed
in solid crystal revolving spheres; or they moved round
the earth in epicycles mounted upon circular orbits;
or they were carried whirling round about the sun,
while the sun was whirling round the earth. About
such doctrines there was no certitude, no more than
there is now certitude about the origin of languages,
the age of man, or the evolution of species, considered
as philosophical questions. Now theology is at present
in the very same state in which natural science was five
hundred years ago; and this is the proof of it,&mdash;that,
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
instead of there being one received theological science in
the world, there are a multitude of hypotheses. We
have a professed science of Atheism, another of Deism, a
Pantheistic, ever so many Christian theologies, to say
nothing of Judaism, Islamism, and the Oriental religions.
Each of these creeds has its own upholders, and these
upholders all certain that it is the very and the only
truth, and these same upholders, it may happen, presently
giving it up, and then taking up some other
creed, and being certain again, as they profess, that it
and it only is the truth, these various so-called truths
being incompatible with each other. Are not Jews
certain about their interpretation of their law? yet they
become Christians: are not Catholics certain about the
new law? yet they become Protestants. At present then,
and as yet, there is no clear certainty anywhere about
religious truth at all; it has still to be discovered; and
therefore for Catholics to claim the right to lay down
the first principles of theological science in their own
way, is to assume the very matter in dispute. First let
their doctrines be universally received, and then they
will have a right to place them on a level with the
certainty which belongs to the laws of motion or of
refraction. This is the objection which I propose to
consider.
</p>

<p>
Now first as to the want of universal reception which
is urged against the Catholic dogmas, this part of the
objection will not require many words. Surely a truth
or a fact may be certain, though it is not generally
received;&mdash;we are each of us ever gaining through our
senses various certainties, which no one shares with us;
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
again, the certainties of the sciences are in the possession
of a few countries only, and for the most part only of
the educated classes in those countries; yet the philosophers
of Europe and America would feel certain that the
earth rolled round the sun, in spite of the Indian belief
of its being supported by an elephant with a tortoise
under it. The Catholic Church then, though not universally
acknowledged, may without inconsistency claim
to teach the primary truths of religion, just as modern
science, though but partially received, claims to teach
the great principles and laws which are the foundation
of secular knowledge, and that with a significance to
which no other religious system can pretend, because
it is its very profession to speak to all mankind, and its
very badge to be ever making converts all over the earth,
whereas other religions are more or less variable in their
teaching, tolerant of each other, and local, and professedly
local, in their <emph>habitat</emph> and character.
</p>

<p>
This, however, is not the main point of the objection;
the real difficulty lies not in the variety of religions, but
in the contradiction, conflict, and change of religious
certitudes. Truth need not be universal, but it must
of necessity be certain; and certainty, in order to be
certainty, must endure; yet how is this reasonable
expectation fulfilled in the case of religion? On the
contrary, those who have been the most certain in their
beliefs are sometimes found to lose them, Catholics as
well as others; and then to take up new beliefs, perhaps
contrary ones, of which they become as certain as if they
had never been certain of the old.
</p>

<p>
In answering this representation, I begin with recurring
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
to the remark which I have already made, that
assent and certitude have reference to propositions, one
by one. We may of course assent to a number of propositions
all together, that is, we may make a number
of assents all at once; but in doing so we run the risk
of putting upon one level, and treating as if of the same
value, acts of the mind which are very different from
each other in character and circumstance. An assent,
indeed, is ever an assent; but given assents may be
strong or weak, deliberate or impulsive, lasting or
ephemeral. Now a religion is not a proposition, but a
system; it is a rite, a creed, a philosophy, a rule of duty,
all at once; and to accept a religion is neither a simple
assent to it nor a complex, neither a conviction nor
a prejudice, neither a notional assent nor a real, not
a mere act of profession, nor of credence, nor of opinion,
nor of speculation, but it is a collection of all these
various kinds of assents, some of one description, some
of another; but, out of all these different assents, how
many are of that kind which I have called certitude?
Certitudes indeed do not change, but who shall pretend
that assents are indefectible?
</p>

<p>
For instance: the fundamental dogma of Protestantism
is the exclusive authority of Holy Scripture; but in
holding this a Protestant holds a host of propositions,
explicitly or implicitly, and holds them with assents of
various character. Among these propositions, he holds
that Scripture is the Divine Revelation itself, that it is
inspired, that nothing is known in doctrine but what is
there, that the Church has no authority in matters
of doctrine, that, as claiming it, it condemned long
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
ago in the Apocalypse, that St. John wrote the Apocalypse,
that justification is by faith only, that our Lord
is God, that there are seventy-two generations between
Adam and our Lord. Now of which, out of all these
propositions, is he certain? and to how many of them
is his assent of one and the same description? His
belief, that Scripture is commensurate with the Divine
Revelation, is perhaps implicit, not conscious; as to
inspiration, he does not well know what the word means,
and his assent is scarcely more than a profession; that
no doctrine is true but what can be proved from Scripture
he understands, and his assent to it is what I have
called speculative; that the Church has no authority he
holds with a real assent or belief; that the Church is
condemned in the Apocalypse is a standing prejudice;
that St. John wrote the Apocalypse is his opinion; that
justification is by faith only, he accepts, but scarcely can
be said to apprehend; that our Lord is God perhaps he
is certain; that there are seventy-two generations between
Adam and Christ he accepts on credence. Yet, if
he were asked the question, he would most probably
answer that he was certain of the truth of <q>Protestantism,</q>
though <q>Protestantism</q> means these things and
a hundred more all at once, and though he believes with
actual certitude only one of them all,&mdash;that indeed a
dogma of most sacred importance, but not the discovery
of Luther or Calvin. He would think it enough to say
that he was a foe to <q>Romanism</q> and <q>Socinianism,</q>
and to avow that he gloried in the Reformation. He
looks upon each of these religious professions, Protestantism,
Romanism, Socinianism and Theism, merely as
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
units, as if they were not each made up of many elements,
as if they had nothing in common, as if a transition
from the one to the other involved a simple obliteration
of all that had been as yet written on his mind, and
would be the reception of a new faith.
</p>

<p>
When, then, we are told that a man has changed
from one religion to another, the first question which we
have to ask, is, have the first and the second religions
nothing in common? If they have common doctrines,
he has changed only a portion of his creed, not the
whole: and the next question is, has he ever made much
of those doctrines which are common to his new creed and
his old? and then again, what doctrines was he certain of
among the old, and what among the new?
</p>

<p>
Thus, of three Protestants, one becomes a Catholic, a
second a Unitarian, and a third an unbeliever: how is
this? The first becomes a Catholic, because he assented,
as a Protestant, to the doctrine of our Lord's divinity,
with a real assent and a genuine conviction, and because
this certitude, taking possession of his mind, led him on
to welcome the Catholic doctrines of the Real Presence
and of the Theotocos, till his Protestantism fell off from
him, and he submitted himself to the Church. The
second became a Unitarian, because, proceeding on the
principle that Scripture was the rule of faith and that a
man's private judgment was its rule of interpretation,
and finding that the doctrine of the Nicene and Athanasian
Creeds did not follow by logical necessity from the
text of Scripture, he said to himself, <q>The word of God
has been made of none effect by the traditions of men,</q>
and therefore nothing was left for him but to profess what
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
he considered primitive Christianity, and to become a
Humanitarian. The third gradually subsided into infidelity,
because he started with the Protestant dogma,
cherished in the depths of his nature, that a priesthood
was a corruption of the simplicity of the Gospel. First,
then, he would protest against the sacrifice of the Mass;
next he gave up baptismal regeneration, and the sacramental
principle; then he asked himself whether dogmas
were not a restraint on Christian liberty as well as sacraments;
then came the question, what after all was the
use of teachers of religion? why should any one stand
between him and his Maker? After a time it struck
him, that this obvious question had to be answered by
the Apostles, as well as by the Anglican clergy; so he
came to the conclusion that the true and only revelation
of God to man is that which is written on the heart.
This did for a time, and he remained a Deist. But then
it occurred to him, that this inward moral law was there
within the breast, whether there was a God or not, and
that it was a roundabout way of enforcing that law, to
say that it came from God, and simply unnecessary,
considering it carried with it its own sacred and sovereign
authority, as our feelings instinctively testified;
and when he turned to look at the physical world around
him, he really did not see what scientific proof there was
there of the Being of God at all, and it seemed to him
as if all things would go on quite as well as at present,
without that hypothesis as with it; so he dropped it,
and became a <foreign rend='italic'>purus</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>putus</foreign> Atheist.
</p>

<p>
Now the world will say, that in these three cases old
certitudes were lost, and new were gained; but it is not
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
so: each of the three men started with just one certitude,
as he would have himself professed, had he
examined himself narrowly; and he carried it out and
carried it with him into a new system of belief. He
was true to that one conviction from first to last; and
on looking back on the past, would perhaps insist upon
this, and say he had really been consistent all through,
when others made much of his great changes in religious
opinion. He has indeed made serious additions to his
initial ruling principle, but he has lost no conviction of
which he was originally possessed.
</p>

<p>
I will take one more instance. A man is converted
to the Catholic Church from his admiration of its religious
system, and his disgust with Protestantism. That
admiration remains; but, after a time, he leaves his new
faith, perhaps returns to his old. The reason, if we may
conjecture, may sometimes be this: he has never believed
in the Church's infallibility; in her doctrinal truth he
has believed, but in her infallibility, no. He was asked,
before he was received, whether he held all that the
Church taught, he replied he did; but he understood
the question to mean, whether he held those particular
doctrines <q>which at that time the Church in matter of
fact formally taught,</q> whereas it really meant <q>whatever
the Church then or at any future time should
teach.</q> Thus, he never had the indispensable and elementary
faith of a Catholic, and was simply no subject
for reception into the fold of the Church. This being
the case, when the Immaculate Conception is defined,
he feels that it is something more than he bargained
for when he became a Catholic, and accordingly he
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
gives up his religious profession. The world will say
that he has lost his certitude of the divinity of the
Catholic Faith, but he never had it.
</p>

<p>
The first point to be ascertained, then, when we hear
of a change of religious certitude in another, is, what
the doctrines are on which his so-called certitude before
now and at present has respectively fallen. All doctrines
besides these were the accidents of his profession, and
the indefectibility of certitude would not be disproved,
though he changed them every year. There are few
religions which have no points in common; and these,
whether true or false, when embraced with an absolute
conviction, are the pivots on which changes take place
in that collection of credences, opinions, prejudices, and
other assents, which make up what is called a man's
selection and adoption of a form of religion, a denomination,
or a Church. There have been Protestants
whose idea of enlightened Christianity has been a
strenuous antagonism to what they consider the unmanliness
and unreasonableness of Catholic morality, an
antipathy to the precepts of patience, meekness, forgiveness
of injuries, and chastity. All this they have
considered a woman's religion, the ornament of monks,
of the sick, the feeble, and the old. Lust, revenge,
ambition, courage, pride, these, they have fancied, made
the man, and want of them the slave. No one could
fairly accuse such men of any great change of their
convictions, or refer to them in proof of the defectibility
of certitude, if they were one day found to have taken
up the profession of Islam.
</p>

<p>
And if this intercommunion of religions holds good,
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
even when the common points between them are but
errors held in common, much more natural will be the
transition from one religion to another, without injury
to existing certitudes, when the common points, the
objects of those certitudes, are truths; and still stronger
in that case and more constraining will be the sympathy,
with which minds that love truth, even when they have
surrounded it with error, will yearn towards the
Catholic faith, which contains within itself, and claims
as its own, all truth that is elsewhere to be found, and
more than all, and nothing but truth. This is the
secret of the influence, by which the Church draws to
herself converts from such various and conflicting
religions. They come, not to lose what they have, but
to gain what they have not; and in order that, by
means of what they have, more may be given to them.
St. Augustine tells us that there is no false teaching
without an intermixture of truth; and it is by the light
of those particular truths, contained respectively in the
various religions of men, and by our certitudes about
them, which are possible wherever those truths are
found, that we pick our way, slowly perhaps, but surely,
into the One Religion which God has given, taking
our certitudes with us, not to lose, but to keep them
more securely, and to understand and love their objects
more perfectly.
</p>

<p>
Not even are idolaters and heathen out of the range
of some of these religious truths and their correlative
certitudes. The old Greek and Roman polytheists had,
as they show in their literature, clear and strong notions,
nay, vivid mental images, of a Particular Providence, of
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
the power of prayer, of the rule of Divine Governance,
of the law of conscience, of sin and guilt, of expiation
by means of sacrifices, and of future retribution: I will
even add, of the Unity and Personality of the Supreme
Being. This it is that throws such a magnificent light
over the Homeric poems, the tragic choruses, and the
Odes of Pindar; and it has its counterpart in the
philosophy of Socrates and of the Stoics, and in such
historians as Herodotus. It would be out of place to
speak confidently of a state of society which has passed
away, but at first sight it does not appear why the
truths which I have enumerated should not have
received as genuine and deliberate an assent on the part
of Socrates or Cleanthes, (of course with divine aids,
but they do not enter into this discussion,) as was
given to them by St. John or St. Paul, nay, an assent
which rose to certitude. Much more safely may it
be pronounced of a Mahometan, that he may have a
certitude of the Divine Unity, as well as a Christian;
and of a Jew, that he may believe as truly as a Christian
in the resurrection of the body; and of a Unitarian
that he can give a deliberate and real assent to the fact
of a supernatural revelation, to the Christian miracles,
to the eternal moral law, and to the immortality of the
soul. And so, again, a Protestant may, not only in
words, but in mind and heart, hold, as if he were a
Catholic, with simple certitude, the doctrines of the
Holy Trinity, of the fall of man, of the need of regeneration,
of the efficacy of Divine Grace, and of the
possibility and danger of falling away. And thus it is
conceivable that a man might travel in his religious
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
profession all the way from heathenism to Catholicity,
through Mahometanism, Judaism, Unitarianism, Protestantism,
and Anglicanism, without any one certitude
lost, but with a continual accumulation of truths, which
claimed from him and elicited in his intellect fresh and
fresh certitudes.
</p>

<p>
In saying all this, I do not forget that the same
doctrines, as held in different religions, may be and
often are held very differently, as belonging to distinct
wholes or <emph>forms</emph>, as they are called, and exposed to the
influence and the bias of the teaching, perhaps false,
with which they are associated. Thus, for instance,
whatever be the resemblance between St. Augustine's
doctrine of Predestination and the tenet of Calvin upon
it, the two really differ from each other
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>toto cœlo</foreign> in significance
and effect, in consequence of the place they
hold in the systems in which they are respectively incorporated,
just as shades and tints show so differently
in a painting according to the masses of colour to which
they are attached. But, in spite of this, a man may so
hold the doctrine of personal election as a Calvinist, as
to be able still to hold it as a Catholic.
</p>

<p>
However, I have been speaking of certitudes which
remain unimpaired, or rather confirmed, by a change of
religion; on the contrary there are others, whether we
call them certitudes or convictions, which perish in the
change, as St. Paul's conviction of the sufficiency of the
Jewish Law came to an end on his becoming a Christian.
Now how is such a series of facts to be reconciled with
the doctrine which I have been enforcing? What
conviction could be stronger than the faith of the Jews
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
in the perpetuity of the Mosaic system? Those, then,
it may be said, who abandoned Judaism for the Gospel,
surely, in so doing, bore the most emphatic of testimonies
to the defectibility of certitude. And, in like
manner, a Mahometan may be so deeply convinced that
Mahomet is the prophet of God, that it would be only
by a quibble about the meaning of the word <q>certitude</q>
that we could maintain, that, on his becoming a
Catholic, he did not unequivocally prove that certitude
is defectible. And it may be argued, perhaps, in the
case of some members of the Church of England, that
their faith in the validity of Anglican orders, and the
invisibility of the Church's unity, is so absolute, so
deliberate, that their abandonment of it, did they become
Catholics or sceptics, would be tantamount to the
abandonment of a certitude.
</p>

<p>
Now, in meeting this difficulty, I will not urge (lest
I should be accused of quibbling), that certitude is a
conviction of what is true, and that these so-called certitudes
have come to nought, because, their objects being
errors, not truths, they really were not certitudes at all;
nor will I insist, as I might, that they ought to be
proved first to be something more than mere prejudices,
assents without reason and judgment, before they can
fairly be taken as instances of the defectibility of
certitude; but I simply ask, as regards the zeal of the
Jews for the sufficiency of their law, (even though it
implied genuine certitude, not a prejudice, not a mere
conviction,) still was such zeal, such professed certitude,
found in those who were eventually converted, or in
those who were not; for, if those who had not that
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
certitude became Christians and those who had it
remained Jews, then loss of certitude in the latter is not
instanced in the fact of the conversion of the former.
St. Paul certainly is an exception, but his conversion, as
also his after-life, was miraculous; ordinarily speaking,
it was not the zealots who supplied members to the
Catholic Church, but those <q>men of good will,</q> who,
instead of considering the law as perfect and eternal,
<q>looked for the redemption of Israel,</q> and for <q>the
knowledge of salvation in the remission of sins.</q> And,
in like manner, as to those learned and devout men
among the Anglicans at the present day, who come so
near the Church without acknowledging her claims, I
ask whether there are not two classes among them also,&mdash;those
who are looking out beyond their own body for
the perfect way, and those on the other hand who teach
that the Anglican communion is the golden mean
between men who believe too much and men who
believe too little, the centre of unity to which East and
West are destined to gravitate, the instrument and the
mould, as the Jews might think of their own moribund
institutions, through which the kingdom of Christ is to
be established all over the earth. And next I would
ask, which of these two classes supplies converts to the
Church; for if they come from among those who never
professed to be quite certain of the special strength of
the Anglican position, such men cannot be quoted as
instances of the defectibility of certitude.
</p>

<p>
There is indeed another class of beliefs, of which I
must take notice, the failure of which may be taken at
first sight as a proof that certitude may be lost. Yet
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
they clearly deserve no other name than prejudices, as
being founded upon reports of facts, or on arguments,
which will not bear careful examination. Such was the
disgust felt towards our predecessors in primitive times,
the Christians of the first centuries, as a secret society,
as a conspiracy against the civil power, as a set of mean,
sordid, despicable fanatics, as monsters revelling in blood
and impurity. Such also is the deep prejudice now existing
against the Church among Protestants, who dress her up
in the most hideous and loathsome images, which rightly
attach, in the prophetic descriptions, to the evil spirit,
his agents and instruments. And so of the numberless
calumnies directed against individual Catholics,
against our religious bodies, and men in authority,
which serve to feed and sustain the suspicion and dislike
with which everything Catholic is regarded in this
country. But as a persistence in such prejudices is no
evidence of their truth, so an abandonment of them is
no evidence that certitude can fail.
</p>

<p>
There is yet another class of prejudices against the
Catholic Religion, which is far more tolerable and
intelligible than those on which I have been dwelling,
but still in no sense certitudes. Indeed, I doubt
whether they would be considered more than presumptive
opinions by the persons who entertain them. Such is
the idea which has possessed certain philosophers,
ancient and modern, that miracles are an infringement
and disfigurement of the beautiful order of nature.
Such, too, is the persuasion, common among political
and literary men, that the Catholic Church is inconsistent
with the true interests of the human race, with social
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
progress, with rational freedom, with good government.
A renunciation of these imaginations is not a change in
certitudes.
</p>

<p>
So much on this subject. All concrete laws are general,
and persons, as such, do not fall under laws. Still, I
have gone a good way, as I think, to remove the
objections to the doctrine of the indefectibility of certitude
in matters of religion.
</p>

<p>
6.
</p>

<p>
One further remark may be made. Certitude does
not admit of an interior, immediate test, sufficient to
discriminate it from false certitude. Such a test is rendered
impossible from the circumstance that, when we
make the mental act expressed by <q>I know,</q> we sum
up the whole series of reflex judgments which might,
each in turn, successively exercise a critical function
towards those of the series which precede it. But still,
if it is the general rule that certitude is indefectible,
will not that indefectibility itself become at least in the
event a criterion of the genuineness of the certitude? or
is there any rival state or habit of the intellect, which
claims to be indefectible also? A few words will suffice
to answer these questions.
</p>

<p>
Premising that all rules are but general, especially
those which relate to the mind, I observe that indefectibility
may at least serve as a negative test of certitude,
or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sine quâ
non</foreign> condition, so that whoever loses his
conviction on a given point is thereby proved not to
have been certain of it. Certitude ought to stand all
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
trials, or it is not certitude. Its very office is to cherish
and maintain its object, and its very lot and duty is to
sustain rude shocks in maintenance of it without being
damaged by them.
</p>

<p>
I will take an example. Let us suppose we are told
on an unimpeachable authority, that a man whom we
saw die is now alive again and at his work, as it was his
wont to be; let us suppose we actually see him and
converse with him; what will become of our certitude
of his death? I do not think we should give it up; how
could we, when we actually saw him die? At first,
indeed, we should be thrown into an astonishment and
confusion so great, that the world would seem to reel
round us, and we should be ready to give up the use of
our senses and of our memory, of our reflective powers,
and of our reason, and even to deny our power of
thinking, and our existence itself. Such confidence have
we in the doctrine that when life goes it never returns.
Nor would our bewilderment be less, when the first blow
was over; but our reason would rally, and with our
reason our certitude would come back to us. Whatever
came of it, we should never cease to know and to confess
to ourselves both of the contrary facts, that we saw him
die, and that after dying we saw him alive again. The
overpowering strangeness of our experience would have
no power to shake our certitude in the facts which
created it.
</p>

<p>
Again, let us suppose, for argument's sake, that
ethnologists, philologists, anatomists, and antiquarians
agreed together in separate demonstrations that there
were half a dozen races of men, and that they were all
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
descended from gorillas, or chimpanzees, or ourang-outangs,
or baboons; moreover, that Adam was an
historical personage, with a well-ascertained dwelling-place,
surroundings and date, in a comparatively modern
world. On the other hand, let me believe that the Word
of God Himself distinctly declares that there were no
men before Adam, that he was immediately made out of
the slime of the earth, and that he is the first father of
all men that are or ever have been. Here is a contradiction
of statements more direct than in the former
instance; the two cannot stand together; one or other
of them is untrue. But whatever means I might be led
to take, for making, if possible, the antagonism tolerable,
I conceive I should never give up my certitude in that
truth which on sufficient grounds I determined to come
from heaven. If I so believed, I should not pretend to
argue, or to defend myself to others; I should be patient;
I should look for better days; but I should still
believe. If, indeed, I had hitherto only half believed, if
I believed with an assent short of certitude, or with an acquiescence
short of assent, or hastily or on light grounds,
then the case would be altered; but if, after full
consideration, and availing myself of my best lights,
I did think that beyond all question God spoke as I
thought He did, philosophers and experimentalists might
take their course for me,&mdash;I should consider that they
and I thought and reasoned in different mediums, and
that my certitude was as little in collision with them or
damaged by them, as if they attempted to counteract in
some great matter chemical action by the force of
gravity, or to weigh magnetic influence against capillary
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
attraction. Of course, I am putting an impossible case,
for philosophical discoveries cannot really contradict
divine revelation.
</p>

<p>
So much on the indefectibility of certitude; as to the
question whether any other assent is indefectible besides
it, I think prejudice may be such; but it cannot be
confused with certitude, for the one is an assent previous
to rational grounds, and the other an assent given
expressly after careful examination.
</p>

<p>
It seems then that on the whole there are three conditions
of certitude: that it follows on investigation
and proof, that it is accompanied by a specific sense of
intellectual satisfaction and repose, and that it is irreversible.
If the assent is made without rational grounds,
it is a rash judgment, a fancy, or a prejudice; if without
the sense of finality, it is scarcely more than an inference;
if without permanence, it is a mere conviction.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. Inference.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 1. Formal Inference.</head>

<p>
Inference is the conditional acceptance of a proposition,
Assent is the unconditional; the object of Assent is a
truth, the object of Inference is the truth-like or a
verisimilitude. The problem which I have undertaken
is that of ascertaining how it comes to pass that a
conditional act leads to an unconditional; and, having
now shown that assent really is unconditional, I proceed
to show how inferential exercises, as such, always must
be conditional.
</p>

<p>
We reason, when we hold this by virtue of that;
whether we hold it as evident or as approximating or
tending to be evident, in either case we so hold it
because of holding something else to be evident or
tending to be evident. In the next place, our reasoning
ordinarily presents itself to our mind as a simple act,
not a process or series of acts. We apprehend the
antecedent and then apprehend the consequent, without
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
explicit recognition of the medium connecting the two,
as if by a sort of direct association of the first thought
with the second. We proceed by a sort of instinctive
perception, from premiss to conclusion. I call it instinctive,
not as if the faculty were one and the same
to all men in strength and quality (as we generally
conceive of instinct), but because ordinarily, or at least
often, it acts by a spontaneous impulse, as prompt and
inevitable as the exercise of sense and memory. We
perceive external objects, and we remember past events,
without knowing how we do so; and in like manner we
reason without effort and intention, or any necessary
consciousness of the path which the mind takes in
passing from antecedent to conclusion.
</p>

<p>
Such is ratiocination, in what may be called a state of
nature, as it is found in the uneducated,&mdash;nay, in all
men, in its ordinary exercise; nor is there any antecedent
ground for determining that it will not be as correct in
its informations as it is instinctive, as trustworthy as are
sensible perception and memory, though its informations
are not so immediate and have a wider range. By
means of sense we gain knowledge directly; by means
of reasoning we gain it indirectly, that is, by virtue of a
previous knowledge. And if we may justly regard the
universe, according to the meaning of the word, as one
whole, we may also believe justly that to know one part
of it is necessarily to know much more than that one
part. This thought leads us to a further view of
ratiocination. The proverb says, <q>Ex pede Herculem;</q>
and we have actual experience how the practised
zoologist can build up some intricate organization from
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
the sight of its smallest bone, evoking the whole as if
it were a remembrance; how, again, a philosophical
antiquarian, by means of an inscription, interprets the
mythical traditions of former ages, and makes the past
live; and how a Columbus is led, from considerations
which are common property, and fortuitous phenomena
which are successively brought to his notice, to have such
faith in a western world, as willingly to commit himself
to the terrors of a mysterious ocean in order to arrive at
it. That which the mind is able thus variously to bring
together into unity, must have some real intrinsic
connexion of part with part. But if this
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>summa rerum</foreign>
is thus one whole, it must be constructed on definite
principles and laws, the knowledge of which will enlarge
our capacity of reasoning about it in particulars;&mdash;thus
we are led on to aim at determining on a large scale and
on system, what even gifted or practised intellects are
only able by their own personal vigour to reach piece-meal
and fitfully, that is, at substituting scientific
methods, such as all may use, for the action of individual
genius.
</p>

<p>
There is another reason for attempting to discover an
instrument of reasoning (that is, of gaining new truths
by means of old), which may be less vague and arbitrary
than the talent and experience of the few or the common-sense
of the many. As memory is not always accurate,
and has on that account led to the adoption of writing,
as being a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>memoria technica</foreign>,
unaffected by the failure of
mental impressions,&mdash;as our senses at times deceive us,
and have to be corrected by each other; so is it also with
our reasoning faculty. The conclusions of one man are
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
not the conclusions of another; those of the same man
do not always agree together; those of ever so many
who agree together may differ from the facts themselves,
which those conclusions are intended to ascertain. In
consequence it becomes a necessity, if it be possible, to
analyze the process of reasoning, and to invent a method
which may act as a common measure between mind and
mind, as a means of joint investigation, and as a
recognized intellectual standard,&mdash;a standard such as to
secure us against hopeless mistakes, and to emancipate
us from the capricious <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipse dixit</foreign> of authority.
</p>

<p>
As the index on the dial notes down the sun's course
in the heavens, as a key, revolving through the intricate
wards of the lock, opens for us a treasure-house, so let
us, if we can, provide ourselves with some ready
expedient to serve as a true record of the system of
objective truth, and an available rule for interpreting its
phenomena; or at least let us go as far as we can in
providing it. One such experimental key is the science
of geometry, which, in a certain department of nature,
substitutes a collection of true principles, fruitful and
interminable in consequences, for the guesses,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pro re natâ</foreign>,
of our intellect, and saves it both the labour and the
risk of guessing. Another far more subtle and effective
instrument is algebraical science, which acts as a spell in
unlocking for us, without merit or effort of our own
individually, the <emph>arcana</emph> of the concrete physical universe.
A more ambitious, because a more comprehensive contrivance
still, for interpreting the concrete world is the
method of logical inference. What we desiderate is
something which may supersede the need of personal
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
gifts by a far-reaching and infallible rule. Now, without
external symbols to mark out and to steady its course,
the intellect runs wild; but with the aid of symbols, as
in algebra, it advances with precision and effect. Let
then our symbols be words: let all thought be arrested
and embodied in words. Let language have a monopoly
of thought; and thought go for only so much as it can
show itself to be worth in language. Let every
prompting of the intellect be ignored, every <emph>momentum</emph>
of argument be disowned, which is unprovided with an
equivalent wording, as its ticket for sharing in the
common search after truth. Let the authority of
nature, common-sense, experience, genius, go for nothing.
Ratiocination, thus restricted and put into grooves, is
what I have called Inference, and the science, which is
its regulating principle, is Logic.
</p>

<p>
The first step in the inferential method is to throw
the question to be decided into the form of a proposition;
then to throw the proof itself into propositions,
the force of the proof lying in the comparison of these
propositions with each other. When the analysis is
carried out fully and put into form, it becomes the
Aristotelic syllogism. However, an inference need not
be expressed thus technically; an enthymeme fulfils the
requirements of what I have called Inference. So does
any other form of words with the mere grammatical
expressions, <q>for,</q> <q>therefore,</q> <q>supposing,</q> <q>so that,</q>
<q>similarly,</q> and the like. Verbal reasoning, of whatever
kind, as opposed to mental, is what I mean by inference,
which differs from logic only inasmuch as logic is its
scientific form. And it will be more convenient here to
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
use the two words indiscriminately, for I snail say
nothing about logic which does not in its substance also
apply to inference.
</p>

<p>
Logical inference, then, being such, and its office such
as I have described, the question follows, how far it
answers the purpose for which it is used. It proposes to
provide both a test and a common measure of reasoning;
and I think it will be found partly to succeed and
partly to fail; succeeding so far as words can in fact be
found for representing the countless varieties and subtleties
of human thought, failing on account of the fallacy
of the original assumption, that whatever can be thought
can be adequately expressed in words.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, Inference, being conditional, is
hampered with other propositions besides that which is
especially its own, that is, with the premisses as well as
the conclusion, and with the rules connecting the latter
with the former. It views its own proper proposition in
the medium of prior propositions, and measures it by
them. It does not hold a proposition for its own sake,
but as dependent upon others, and those others it
entertains for the sake of the conclusion. Thus it is
practically far more concerned with the comparison of
propositions, than with the propositions themselves.
It is obliged to regard all the propositions, with which
it has to do, not so much for their own sake, as for the
sake of each other, as regards the identity or likeness,
independence or dissimilarity, which has to be mutually
predicated of them. It follows from this, that the more
simple and definite are the words of a proposition, and
the narrower their meaning, and the more that meaning
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
in each proposition is restricted to the relation which it
has to the words of the other propositions compared
with it,&mdash;in other words, the nearer the propositions
concerned in the inference approach to being mental
abstractions, and the less they have to do with the
concrete reality, and the more closely they are made to
express exact, intelligible, comprehensible, communicable
notions, and the less they stand for objective
things, that is, the more they are the subjects, not of
real, but of notional apprehension,&mdash;so much the more
suitable do they become for the purposes of Inference.
</p>

<p>
Hence it is that no process of argument is so perfect,
as that which is conducted by means of symbols. In
Arithmetic 1 is 1, and just 1, and never anything else
but 1; it never is 2, it has no tendency to change its
meaning, and to become 2; it has no portion, quality,
admixture of 2 in its meaning. And 6 under all circumstances
is 3 times 2, and the sum of 2 and 4; nor can
the whole world supply anything to throw doubt upon
these elementary positions. It is not so with language.
Take, by contrast, the word <q>inference,</q> which I have
been using: it may stand for the act of inferring, as I
have used it; or for the connecting principle, or
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>inferentia</foreign>,
between premisses and conclusions; or for the conclusion
itself. And sometimes it will be difficult, in a particular
sentence, to say which it bears of these three senses.
And so again in Algebra, <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> is
never <hi rend='italic'>x</hi>, or anything but
<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, wherever it is found;
and <hi rend='italic'>a</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>b</hi> are always standard
quantities, to which <hi rend='italic'>x</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>y</hi> are always to be referred,
and by which they are always to be measured. In
Geometry again, the subjects of argument, points, lines,
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
and surfaces, are precise creations of the mind, suggested
indeed by external objects, but meaning nothing but
what they are defined to mean: they have no colour, no
motion, no heat, no qualities which address themselves
to the ear or to the palate; so that, in whatever combinations
or relations the words denoting them occur, and
to whomsoever they come, those words never vary in
their meaning, but are just of the same measure and
weight at one time and at another.
</p>

<p>
What is true of Arithmetic, Algebra, and Geometry,
is true also of Aristotelic argumentation in its typical
modes and figures. It compares two given words separately
with a third, and then determines how they stand
towards each other, in a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>bona
fide</foreign> identity of sense. In
consequence, its formal process is best conducted by
means of symbols, A, B, and C. While it keeps to
these, it is safe; it has the cogency of mathematical
reasoning, and draws its conclusions by a rule as unerring
as it is blind.
</p>

<p>
Symbolical notation, then, being the perfection of the
syllogistic method, it follows that, when words are
substituted for symbols, it will be its aim to circumscribe
and stint their import as much as possible, lest
perchance A should not always exactly mean A, and B
mean B; and to make them, as much as possible, the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>calculi</foreign>
of notions, which are in our absolute power, as
meaning just what we choose them to mean, and as
little as possible the tokens of real things, which are outside
of us, and which mean we do not know how much,
but so much certainly as may run away with us, in proportion
as we enter into them, beyond the range of
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
scientific management. The concrete matter of propositions
is a constant source of trouble to syllogistic
reasoning, as marring the simplicity and perfection of
its process. Words, which denote things, have innumerable
implications; but in inferential exercises it is
the very triumph of that clearness and hardness of head,
which is the characteristic talent for the art, to have
stripped them of all these connatural senses, to have
drained them of that depth and breadth of associations
which constitute their poetry, their rhetoric, and their
historical life, to have starved each term down till it has
become the ghost of itself, and everywhere one and the
same ghost, <q>omnibus umbra locis,</q> so that it may
stand for just one unreal aspect of the concrete thing to
which it properly belongs, for a relation, a generalization,
or other abstraction, for a notion neatly turned out
of the laboratory of the mind, and sufficiently tame and
subdued, because existing only in a definition.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is that the logician for his own purposes,
and most usefully as far as those purposes are concerned,
turns rivers, full, winding, and beautiful, into navigable
canals. To him dog or horse is not a thing which he
sees, but a mere name suggesting ideas; and by dog or
horse universal he means, not the aggregate of all individual
dogs or horses brought together, but a common
aspect, meagre but precise, of all existing or possible
dogs or horses, which all the while does not really correspond
to any one single dog or horse out of the whole
aggregate. Such minute fidelity in the representation
of individuals is neither necessary nor possible to his
art; his business is not to ascertain facts in the concrete,
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
but to find and dress up middle terms; and, provided
they and the extremes which they go between are
not equivocal, either in themselves or in their use, and
he can enable his pupils to show well in a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vivâ voce</foreign>
disputation, or in a popular harangue, or in a written
dissertation, he has achieved the main purpose of his
profession.
</p>

<p>
Such are the characteristics of reasoning, viewed as a
science or scientific art, or inferential process, and we
might anticipate that, narrow as by necessity is its field
of view, for that reason its pretensions to be demonstrative
were incontrovertible. In a certain sense they
really are so; while we talk logic, we are unanswerable;
but then, on the other hand, this universal living scene
of things is after all as little a logical world as it is a
poetical; and, as it cannot without violence be exalted
into poetical perfection, neither can it be attenuated into
a logical formula. Abstract can only conduct to abstract;
but we have need to attain by our reasonings to what
is concrete; and the margin between the abstract conclusions
of the science, and the concrete facts which we
wish to ascertain, will be found to reduce the force of
the inferential method from demonstration to the mere
determination of the probable. Thus, whereas (as I have
already said) Inference starts with conditions, as starting
with premisses, here are two reasons why, when employed
upon matters of fact, it can only conclude probabilities:
first, because its premisses are assumed, not proved; and
secondly, because its conclusions are abstract, and not
concrete. I will now consider these two points separately.
</p>

<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>

<p>
1.
</p>

<p>
Inference comes short of proof in concrete matters,
because it has not a full command over the objects to
which it relates, but merely assumes its premisses. In
order to complete the proof, we are thrown upon some
previous syllogism or syllogisms, in which the assumptions
may be proved; and then, still farther back, we
are thrown upon others again, to prove the new assumptions
of that second order of syllogisms. Where is
this process to stop? especially since it must run upon
separated, divergent, and multiplied lines of argument,
the farther the investigation is carried back. At length
a score of propositions present themselves, all to be proved
by propositions more evident than themselves, in order
to enable them respectively to become premisses to that
series of inferences which terminates in the conclusion
which we originally drew. But even now the difficulty
is not at an end; it would be something to arrive at
length at premisses which are undeniable, however long
we might be in arriving at them; but in this case the
long retrospection lodges us at length at what are
called first principles, the recondite sources of all knowledge,
as to which logic provides no common measure
of minds,&mdash;which are accepted by some, rejected by
others,&mdash;in which, and not in the syllogistic exhibitions,
lies the whole problem of attaining to truth,&mdash;and which
are called self-evident by their respective advocates
because they are evident in no other way. One of
the two uses contemplated in reasoning by rule, or in
verbal argumentation, was, as I have said, to establish
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
a standard of truth and to supersede the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipse dixit</foreign> of
authority: how does it fulfil this end, if it only leads us
back to first principles, about which there is interminable
controversy? We are not able to prove by syllogism
that there are any self-evident propositions at all; but
supposing there are (as of course I hold there are), still
who can determine these by logic? Syllogism, then,
though of course it has its use, still does only the
minutest and easiest part of the work, in the investigation
of truth, for when there is any difficulty, that
difficulty commonly lies in determining first principles,
not in the arrangement of proofs.
</p>

<p>
Even when argument is the most direct and severe of
its kind, there must be those assumptions in the process
which resolve themselves into the conditions of human
nature; but how many more assumptions does that
process in ordinary concrete matters involve, subtle
assumptions not directly arising out of these primary
conditions, but accompanying the course of reasoning,
step by step, and traceable to the sentiments of the
age, country, religion, social habits and ideas, of the
particular inquirers or disputants, and passing current
without detection, because admitted equally on all hands!
And to these must be added the assumptions which are
made from the necessity of the case, in consequence of
the prolixity and elaborateness of any argument which
should faithfully note down all the propositions which
go to make it up. We recognize this tediousness even
in the case of the theorems of Euclid, though mathematical
proof is comparatively simple.
</p>

<p>
Logic then does not really prove; it enables us to
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
join issue with others; it suggests ideas; it opens views;
it maps out for us the lines of thought; it verifies negatively;
it determines when differences of opinion are
hopeless; and when and how far conclusions are probable;
but for genuine proof in concrete matter we require
an <foreign rend='italic'>organon</foreign> more delicate, versatile, and elastic than
verbal argumentation.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I ought to give an illustration of what I have been
stating in general terms; but it is difficult to do so
without a digression. However, if it must be, I look
round the room in which I happen to be writing, and
take down the first book which catches my eye. It is
an old volume of a Magazine of great name; I open it at
random and fall upon a discussion about the then lately
discovered emendations of the text of Shakespeare. It
will do for my purpose.
</p>

<p>
In the account of Falstaff's death in <q>Henry V.</q>
(act ii. scene 3) we read, according to the received text,
the well-known words, <q>His nose was as sharp as a pen,
and 'a babbled of green fields.</q> In the first authentic
edition, published in 1623, some years after Shakespeare's
death, the words, I believe, ran, <q>and a table of green
fields,</q> which has no sense. Accordingly, an anonymous
critic, reported by Theobald in the last century, corrected
them to <q>and 'a talked of green fields,</q> Theobald
himself improved the reading into <q>and 'a babbled of
green fields,</q> which since his time has been the received
text. But just twenty years ago an annotated copy of
the edition of 1632 was found, annotated perhaps by a
contemporary, which, among as many as 20,000 corrections
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
of the text, substituted for the corrupt reading of
1623, the words <q>on a table of green frieze,</q> which has
a sufficient sense, though far less acceptable to an admirer
of Shakespeare, than Theobald's. The genuineness of
this copy with its annotations, as it is presented to us, I
shall here take for granted.
</p>

<p>
Now I understand, or at least will suppose, the
argument, maintained in the article of the Magazine in
question, to run thus:&mdash;<q>Theobald's reading, as at present
received, is to be retained, to the exclusion of the
text of 1623 and of the emendation made on the copy
of the edition of 1632;&mdash;to the exclusion of the text of
1623 because that text is corrupt; to the exclusion of
the annotation of 1632 because it is anonymous.</q> I
wish it then observed how many large questions are
opened in the discussion which ensues, how many recondite
and untractable principles have to be settled, and
how impotent is logic, or any reasonings which can be
thrown into language, to deal with these indispensable
first principles.
</p>

<p>
The first position is, <q>The authoritative reading of
1623 is not to be restored to the received text, because
it is corrupt.</q> Now are we to take it for granted, as a
first principle, which needs no proof, that a text may
be tampered with, because it is corrupt? However the
corrupt reading arose, it is authoritative. It is found in
an edition, published by known persons, only six years
after Shakespeare's death, from his own manuscript,
as it appears, and with his corrections of earlier faulty
impressions. Authority cannot sanction nonsense, but
it can forbid critics from experimentalizing upon it. If
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
the text of Shakespeare is corrupt, it should be published
as corrupt.
</p>

<p>
I believe the best editors of the Greek tragedians
have given up the impertinence of introducing their
conjectures into the text; and a classic like Shakespeare
has a right to be treated with the same respect as
Æschylus. To this it will be replied, that Shakespeare
is for the general public and Æschylus for students of
a dead language; that the run of men read for amusement
or as a recreation, and that, if the editions of
Shakespeare were made on critical principles, they
would remain unsold. Here, then, we are brought to
the question whether it is any advantage to read
Shakespeare except with the care and pains which a
classic demands, and whether he is in fact read at all by
those whom such critical exactness would offend; and
thus we are led on to further questions about cultivation
of mind and the education of the masses. Further, the
question presents itself, whether the general admiration
of Shakespeare is genuine, whether it is not a mere
fashion, whether the multitude of men understand him
at all, whether it is not true that every one makes
much of him, because every one else makes much of
him. Can we possibly make Shakespeare light reading,
especially in this day of cheap novels, by ever so much
correction of his text?
</p>

<p>
Now supposing this point settled, and the text of
1623 put out of court, then comes the claim of the
Annotator to introduce into Shakespeare's text the
emendation made upon his copy of the edition of 1632;
why is he not of greater authority than Theobald, the
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
inventor of the received reading, and his emendation of
more authority than Theobald's? If the corrupt reading
must any how be got out of the way, why should not the
Annotator, rather than Theobald, determine its substitute?
For what we know, the authority of the anonymous Annotator
may be very great. There is nothing to show that
he was not a contemporary of the poet; and if so, the
question arises, what is the character of his emendations?
are they his own private and arbitrary conjectures, or
are they informations from those who knew Shakespeare,
traditions of the theatre, of the actors or spectators of
his plays? Here, then, we are involved in intricate
questions which can only be decided by a minute examination
of the 20,000 emendations so industriously brought
together by this anonymous critic. But it is obvious
that a verbal argumentation upon 20,000 corrections is
impossible: there must be first careful processes of
perusal, classification, discrimination, selection, which
mainly are acts of the mind without the intervention of
language. There must be a cumulation of arguments on
one side and on the other, of which only the heads or
the results can be put upon paper. Next come in
questions of criticism and taste, with their recondite
and disputable premisses, and the usual deductions
from them, so subtle and difficult to follow. All this
being considered, am I wrong in saying that, though
controversy is both possible and useful at all times, yet
it is not adequate to this occasion; rather that that sum-total
of argument (whether for or against the Annotator)
which is furnished by his numerous emendations,&mdash;or
what may be called the multiform, evidential fact, in
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
which the examination of these emendations results,&mdash;requires
rather to be photographed on the individual
mind as by one impression, than admits of delineation
for the satisfaction of the many in any known or
possible language, however rich in vocabulary and
flexible in structure?
</p>

<p>
And now as to the third point which presents itself
for consideration, the claim of Theobald's emendation to
retain its place in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>textus
receptus</foreign>. It strikes me
with wonder that an argument in its defence could have
been put forward to the following effect, viz. that true
though it be, that the Editors of 1623 are of much more
authority than Theobald, and that the Annotator's reading
in the passage in question is more likely to be correct
than Theobald's, nevertheless Theobald's has by this time
acquired a prescriptive right to its place there, the
prescription of more than a hundred years;&mdash;that usurpation
has become legitimacy; that Theobald's words have
sunk into the hearts of thousands; that in fact they have
become Shakespeare's; that it would be a dangerous innovation
and an evil precedent to touch them. If we begin an
unsettlement of the popular mind, where is it to stop?
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears, in order to do justice to the question
before us, we have to betake ourselves to the consideration
of myths, pious frauds, and other grave matters, which
introduce us into a <foreign rend='italic'>sylva</foreign>, dense and intricate, of first
principles and elementary phenomena, belonging to the
domains of archeology and theology. Nor is this all;
when such views of the duty of garbling a classic are
propounded, they open upon us a long vista of sceptical
interrogations which go far to disparage the claims upon
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
us, the genius, the very existence of the great poet to
whose honour these views are intended to minister. For
perhaps, after all, Shakespeare is really but a collection
of many Theobalds, who have each of them a right to
his own share of him. There was a great dramatic
school in his day; he was one of a number of first-rate
artists,&mdash;perhaps they wrote in common. How are we
to know what is his, or how much? Are the best parts
his, or the worst? It is said that the players put in
what is vulgar and offensive in his writings; perhaps
they inserted the beauties. I have heard it urged years
ago, as an objection to Sheridan's claim of authorship to
the plays which bear his name, that they were so unlike
each other; is not this the very peculiarity of those
imputed to Shakespeare? Were ever the writings of
one man so various, so impersonal? can we form any one
true idea of what he was in history or character, by means
of them? is he not in short
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>vox et præterea nihil</foreign></q>?
Then again, in corroboration, is there any author's life
so deficient in biographical notices as his? We know
about Hooker, Spenser, Spelman, Raleigh, Harvey, his
contemporaries: what do we know of Shakespeare? Is
he much more than a name? Is not the traditional
object of an Englishman's idolatry after all a nebula of
genius, destined, like Homer, to be resolved into its
separate and independent luminaries, as soon as we have
a criticism powerful enough for the purpose? I must
not be supposed for a moment to countenance such scepticism
myself,&mdash;though it is a subject worthy the attention
of a sceptical age: here I have introduced it simply
to suggest how many words go to make up a thoroughly
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
valid argument; how short and easy a way to a true
conclusion is the logic of good sense; how little syllogisms
have to do with the formation of opinion; how
little depends upon the inferential proofs, and how much
upon those pre-existing beliefs and views, in which men
either already agree with each other or hopelessly differ,
before they begin to dispute, and which are hidden
deep in our nature, or, it may be, in our personal
peculiarities.
</p>

<p>
2.
</p>

<p>
So much on the multiplicity of assumptions, which
in spite of formal exactness, logical reasoning in concrete
matters is forced to admit, and on the consequent uncertainty
which attends its conclusions. Now I come to
the second reason why its conclusions are thus wanting
in precision.
</p>

<p>
In this world of sense we have to do with things, far
more than with notions. We are not solitary, left to
the contemplation of our own thoughts and their legitimate
developments. We are surrounded by external
beings, and our enunciations are directed to the concrete.
We reason in order to enlarge our knowledge of matters,
which do not depend on us for being what they are.
But how is an exercise of mind, which is for the most
part occupied with notions, not things, competent to
deal with things, except partially and indirectly? This
is the main reason why an inference, however fully
worded, (except perhaps in some peculiar cases, which
are out of place here,) never can reach so far as to ascertain
a fact. As I have already said, arguments about
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
the abstract cannot handle and determine the concrete.
They may approximate to a proof, but they only reach
the probable, because they cannot reach the particular.
</p>

<p>
Even in mathematical physics a margin is left for
possible imperfection in the investigation. When the
planet Neptune was discovered, it was deservedly considered
a triumph of science, that abstract reasonings
had done so much towards determining the planet and
its orbit. There would have been no triumph in success,
had there been no hazard of failure; it is no triumph to
Euclid, in pure mathematics, that the geometrical
conclusions of his second book can be worked out and
verified by algebra.
</p>

<p>
The motions of the heavenly bodies are almost mathematical
in their precision; but there is a multitude of
matters, to which mathematical science is applied,
which are in their nature intricate and obscure, and
require that reasoning by rule should be completed by the
living mind. Who would be satisfied with a navigator
or engineer, who had no practice or experience whereby to
carry on his scientific conclusions out of their native
abstract into the concrete and the real? What is the
meaning of the distrust, which is ordinarily felt, of
speculators and theorists but this, that they are dead to
the necessity of personal prudence and judgment to
qualify and complete their logic? Science, working by
itself, reaches truth in the abstract, and probability in the
concrete; but what we aim at is truth in the concrete.
</p>

<p>
This is true of other inferences besides mathematical.
They come to no definite conclusions about matters of
fact, except as they are made effectual for their purpose
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
by the living intelligence which uses them. <q>All men
have their price; Fabricius is a man; he has his price;</q>
but he had not his price; how is this? Because he is
more than a universal; because he falls under other
universals; because universals are ever at war with each
other; because what is called a universal is only a
general; because what is only general does not lead to
a necessary conclusion. Let us judge him by another
universal. <q>Men have a conscience; Fabricius is a
man; he has a conscience.</q> Until we have actual
experience of Fabricius, we can only say, that, since he
is a man, perhaps he will take a bribe, and perhaps he
will not. <q>Latet dolus in generalibus;</q> they are
arbitrary and fallacious, if we take them for more than
broad views and aspects of things, serving as our notes
and indications for judging of the particular, but not
absolutely touching and determining facts.
</p>

<p>
Let units come first, and (so-called) universals second;
let universals minister to units, not units be sacrificed to
universals. John, Richard, and Robert are individual
things, independent, incommunicable. We may find
some kind of common measure between them, and we
may give it the name of man, man as such, the typical
man, the <hi rend='italic'>auto-anthropos</hi>. We are justified in so doing,
and in investing it with general attributes, and bestowing
on it what we consider a definition. But we think we
may go on to impose our definition on the whole race,
and to every member of it, to the thousand Johns,
Richards, and Roberts who are found in it. No; each
of them is what he is, in spite of it. Not any one of
them is man, as such, or coincides with the <hi rend='italic'>auto-anthropos</hi>.
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
Another John is not necessarily rational, because <q>all
men are rational,</q> for he may be an idiot;&mdash;nor because
<q>man is a being of progress,</q> does the second Richard
progress, for he may be a dunce;&mdash;nor, because <q>man is
made for society,</q> must we therefore go on to deny
that the second Robert is a gipsy or a bandit, as he
is found to be. There is no such thing as stereotyped
humanity; it must ever be a vague, bodiless idea,
because the concrete units from which it is formed are
independent realities. General laws are not inviolable
truths; much less are they necessary causes. Since, as
a rule, men are rational, progressive, and social, there is a
high probability of this rule being true in the case of a
particular person; but we must know him to be sure of it.
</p>

<p>
Each thing has its own nature and its own history.
When the nature and the history of many things are
similar, we say that they have the same nature; but
there is no such thing as one and the same nature; they
are each of them itself, not identical, but like. A law is
not a fact, but a notion. <q>All men die; therefore Elias
has died;</q> but he has not died, and did not die. He
was an exception to the general law of humanity; so
far, he did not come under that law, but under the law
(so to say) of Elias. It was the peculiarity of his
individuality, that he left the world without dying:
what right have we to subject the person of Elias to the
scientific notion of an abstract humanity, which we have
formed without asking his leave? Why must the
tyrant majority find a rule for his history? <q>But all men
are mortal;</q> not so; what is really meant is, that <q>man,
as such, is mortal,</q> or the abstract, typical <hi rend='italic'>auto-anthropos</hi>;
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
therefore the minor premiss ought to be, <q>Elias was the
<hi rend='italic'>auto-anthropos</hi> or abstract man;</q> but he was not, and
could not be the abstract man, nor could any one else,
any more than the average man of an Insurance
Company is every individual man who insures his life
with it. Such a syllogism proves nothing about the
veritable Elias, except in the way of antecedent probability.
If it be said that Elias was exempted from
death, not by nature, but by miracle, what is this to
the purpose, undeniable as it is? Still, to have this
miraculous exemption was the personal prerogative of
Elias. We call it miracle, because God ordinarily acts
otherwise. He who causes men in general to die, gave
to Elias not to die. This miraculous gift comes into the
individuality of Elias. On this individuality we must
fix our thoughts, and not begin our notion of him by
ignoring it. He was a man, and something more than
<q>man</q>; and if we do not take this into account, we
fall into an initial error in our thoughts of him.
</p>

<p>
What is true of Elias is true of every one in his own
place and degree. We call rationality the distinction of
man, when compared with other animals. This is true
in logic; but in fact a man differs from a brute, not in
rationality only, but in all that he is, even in those
respects in which he is most like a brute; so that his
whole self, his bones, limbs, make, life, reason, moral
feeling, immortality, and all that he is besides, is his
real <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>differentia</foreign>,
in contrast to a horse or a dog. And in
like manner as regards John and Richard, when compared
with one another; each is himself, and nothing else, and,
though, regarded abstractedly, the two may fairly be
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
said to have something in common, (viz. that abstract
sameness which does not exist at all,) yet, strictly
speaking, they have nothing in common, for each of
them has a vested interest in all that he himself is; and,
moreover, what seems to be common in the two, becomes
in fact so uncommon, so <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sui
simile</foreign>, in their respective
individualities&mdash;the bodily frame of each is so singled
out from all other bodies by its special constitution,
sound or weak, by its vitality, activity, pathological
history and changes, and, again, the mind of each is so
distinct from all other minds, in disposition, powers, and
habits,&mdash;that, instead of saying, as logicians say, that
the two men differ only in number, we ought, I repeat,
rather to say that they differ from each other in all that
they are, in identity, in incommunicability, in personality.
</p>

<p>
Nor does any real thing admit, by any calculus of
logic, of being dissected into all the possible general
notions which it admits, nor, in consequence, of being
recomposed out of them; though the attempt thus to
treat it is more unpromising in proportion to the
intricacy and completeness of its make. We cannot see
through any one of the myriad beings which make up
the universe, or give the full catalogue of its belongings.
We are accustomed, indeed, and rightly, to speak of the
Creator Himself as incomprehensible; and, indeed, He
is so by an incommunicable attribute; but in a certain
sense each of His creatures is incomprehensible to us
also, in the sense that no one has a perfect understanding
of it but He. We recognize and appropriate aspects of
them, and logic is useful to us in registering these
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
aspects and what they imply; but it does not give us to
know even one individual being.
</p>

<p>
So much on logical argumentation; and in speaking
of the syllogism, I have spoken of all inferential processes
whatever, as expressed in language, (if they are such as
to be reducible to science,) for they all require general
notions, as conditions of their coming to a conclusion.
</p>

<p>
Thus, in the deductive argument, <q>Europe has no
security for peace, till its large standing armies in its
separate states are reduced; for a large standing army
is in its very idea provocative of war,</q> the conclusion is
only probable, for it may so be that in no country is that
pure idea realized, but in every country in concrete fact
there may be circumstances, political or social, which
destroy the abstract dangerousness.
</p>

<p>
So, too, as regards Induction and Analogy, as modes
of Inference; for, whether I argue, <q>This place will
have the cholera, unless it is drained; for there are a
number of well-ascertained cases which point to this
conclusion;</q> or, <q>The sun will rise to-morrow, for it
rose to-day;</q> in either method of reasoning I appeal, in
order to prove a particular case, to a general principle or
law, which has not force enough to warrant more than a
probable conclusion. As to the cholera, the place in
question may have certain antagonist advantages, which
anticipate or neutralize the miasma which is the principle
of the poison; and as to the sun's rising to-morrow,
there was a first day of the sun's rising, and therefore
there may be a last.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
This is what I have to say on formal Inference, when
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
taken to represent Ratiocination. Science in all its
departments has too much simplicity and exactness,
from the nature of the case, to be the measure of fact.
In its very perfection lies its incompetency to settle
particulars and details. As to Logic, its chain of conclusions
hangs loose at both ends; both the point from
which the proof should start, and the points at which it
should arrive, are beyond its reach; it comes short both
of first principles and of concrete issues. Even its most
elaborate exhibitions fail to represent adequately the sum
total of considerations by which an individual mind is
determined in its judgment of things; even its most
careful combinations made to bear on a conclusion want
that steadiness of aim which is necessary for hitting it.
As I said when I began, thought is too keen and
manifold, its sources are too remote and hidden, its
path too personal, delicate, and circuitous, its subject-matter
too various and intricate, to admit of the trammels
of any language, of whatever subtlety and of whatever
compass.
</p>

<p>
Nor is it any disparagement of the proper value of
formal reasonings thus to speak of them. That they
cannot proceed beyond probabilities is most readily
allowed by those who use them most. Philosophers,
experimentalists, lawyers, in their several ways, have
commonly the reputation of being, at least on moral and
religious subjects, hard of belief; because, proceeding in
the necessary investigation by the analytical method of
verbal inference, they find within its limits no sufficient
resources for attaining a conclusion. Nay, they do not
always find it possible in their own special province
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
severally; for, even when in their hearts they have no
doubt about a conclusion, still often, from the habit of
their minds, they are reluctant to own it, and dwell upon
the deficiencies of the evidence, or the possibility of error,
because they speak by rule and by book, though they
judge and determine by common-sense.
</p>

<p>
Every exercise of nature or of art is good in its place;
and the uses of this logical inference are manifold. It
is the great principle of order in our thinking; it
reduces a chaos into harmony; it catalogues the accumulations
of knowledge; it maps out for us the
relations of its separate departments; it puts us in the
way to correct its own mistakes. It enables the independent
intellects of many, acting and re-acting on
each other, to bring their collective force to bear upon
one and the same subject-matter, or the same question.
If language is an inestimable gift to man, the logical
faculty prepares it for our use. Though it does not go
so far as to ascertain truth, still it teaches us the
direction in which truth lies, and how propositions lie
towards each other. Nor is it a slight benefit to know
what is probable, and what is not so, what is needed
for the proof of a point, what is wanting in a theory,
how a theory hangs together, and what will follow, if it
be admitted. Though it does not itself discover the
unknown, it is one principal way by which discoveries
are made. Moreover, a course of argument, which is
simply conditional, will point out when and where
experiment and observation should be applied, or testimony
sought for, as often happens both in physical and
legal questions. A logical hypothesis is the means of
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
holding facts together, explaining difficulties, and
reconciling the imagination to what is strange. And,
again, processes of logic are useful as enabling us to
get over particular stages of an investigation speedily
and surely, as on a journey we now and then gain
time by travelling by night, make short cuts when
the high-road winds, or adopt water-carriage to avoid
fatigue.
</p>

<p>
But reasoning by rule and in words is too natural to
us, to admit of being regarded merely in the light of
utility. Our inquiries spontaneously fall into scientific
sequence, and we think in logic, as we talk in prose,
without aiming at doing so. However sure we are of
the accuracy of our instinctive conclusions, we as instinctively
put them into words, as far as we can; as
preferring, if possible, to have them in an objective
shape which we can fall back upon,&mdash;first for our own
satisfaction, then for our justification with others. Such
a tangible defence of what we hold, inadequate as it
necessarily is, considered as an analysis of our ratiocination
in its length and breadth, nevertheless is in such
sense associated with our holdings, and so fortifies and
illustrates them, that it acts as a vivid apprehension acts,
giving them luminousness and force. Thus inference
becomes a sort of symbol of assent, and even bears upon
action.
</p>

<p>
I have enlarged on these obvious considerations, lest
I should seem paradoxical; but they do not impair the
main position of this Section, that Inference, considered
in the shape of verbal argumentation, determines neither
our principles, nor our ultimate judgments,&mdash;that it is
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
neither the test of truth, nor the adequate basis of
assent.<note place='foot'><p>I have assumed throughout this Section that all verbal
argumentation is ultimately syllogistic; and in consequence that it ever requires
universal propositions and comes short of concrete fact. A friend refers
me to the dispute between Des Cartes and Gassendi, the latter maintaining
against the former that <q>Cogito ergo sum</q> implies the universal
<q>All who think exist.</q> I should deny this with Des Cartes; but
I should say (as indeed he said), that his dictum was not an argument,
but was the expression of a ratiocinative instinct, as I explain below
under the head of <q>Natural Logic.</q>
</p>
<p>
As to the instance <q>Brutes are not men; therefore men are not
brutes,</q> there seems to me no consequence here, neither a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>præter</foreign> nor a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>propter</foreign>, but a tautology.
And as to <q>It was either Tom or Dick that
did it; it was not Dick, ergo,</q> this may be referred to the one great
principle on which all logical reasoning is founded, but really it ought
not to be accounted an inference any more than if I broke a biscuit,
flung half away, and then said of the other half, <q>This is what remains.</q>
It does but state a fact. So, when the 1st, 2nd, or 3rd proposition of
Euclid II. is put before the eyes in a diagram, a boy, before he yet has
learned to reason, sees with his eyes the fact of the thesis, and this <emph>seeing</emph>
it even makes it difficult for him to master the mathematical proof.
Here, then, a <emph>fact</emph> is stated in the form of an <emph>argument</emph>.
</p>
<p>
However, I have inserted parentheses at pp. 277 and 283, in order to
say <q>transeat</q> to the question.
</p></note>
</p>
</div>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 2. Informal Inference.</head>

<p>
It is plain that formal logical sequence is not in fact
the method by which we are enabled to become certain
of what is concrete; and it is equally plain, from what
has been already suggested, what the real and necessary
method is. It is the cumulation of probabilities, independent
of each other, arising out of the nature and
circumstances of the particular case which is under
review; probabilities too fine to avail separately, too
subtle and circuitous to be convertible into syllogisms,
too numerous and various for such conversion, even were
they convertible. As a man's portrait differs from a
sketch of him, in having, not merely a continuous
outline, but all its details filled in, and shades and
colours laid on and harmonized together, such is the
multiform and intricate process of ratiocination, necessary
for our reaching him as a concrete fact, compared
with the rude operation of syllogistic treatment.
</p>

<p>
Let us suppose I wish to convert an educated,
thoughtful Protestant, and accordingly present for his
acceptance a syllogism of the following kind:&mdash;<q>All
Protestants are bound to join the Church; you are
a Protestant: ergo.</q> He answers, we will say, by
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
denying both premisses; and he does so by means of
arguments, which branch out into other arguments, and
those into others, and all of them severally requiring to
be considered by him on their own merits, before the
syllogism reaches him, and in consequence mounting up,
taken all together, into an array of inferential exercises
large and various beyond calculation. Moreover, he is
bound to submit himself to this complicated process from
the nature of the case; he would act rashly, if he did
not; for he is a concrete individual unit, and being so,
is under so many laws, and is the subject of so many
predications all at once, that he cannot determine, offhand,
his position and his duty by the law and the
predication of one syllogism in particular. I mean he
may fairly say, <q>Distinguo,</q> to each of its premisses:
he says, <q>Protestants are bound to join the Church,&mdash;under
circumstances,</q> and <q>I am a Protestant&mdash;in a
certain sense;</q> and therefore the syllogism, at first
sight, does not touch him at all.
</p>

<p>
Before, then, he grants the major, he asks whether all
Protestants really are bound to join the Church&mdash;are
they bound in case they do not feel themselves bound;
if they are satisfied that their present religion is a safe
one; if they are sure it is true; if, on the other hand,
they have grave doubts as to the doctrinal fidelity and
purity of the Church; if they are convinced that the
Church is corrupt; if their conscience instinctively
rejects certain of its doctrines; if history convinces
them that the Pope's power is not <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jure divino</foreign>,
but merely in the order of Providence? if, again, they
are in a heathen country where priests are not? or
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
where the only priest who is to be found exacts of them,
as a condition of their reception, a profession, which the
Creed of Pope Pius IV. says nothing about; for instance,
that the Holy See is fallible even when it teaches, or
that the Temporal Power is an anti-Christian corruption?
On one or other of such grounds he thinks he need not
change his religion; but presently he asks himself, Can
a Protestant be in such a state as to be really satisfied
with his religion, as he has just now been professing?
Can he possibly believe Protestantism came from above,
as a whole? how much of it can he believe came from
above? and, as to that portion which he feels did come
from above, has it not all been derived to him from the
Church, when traced to its source? Is not Protestantism
in itself a negation? Did not the Church exist before
it? and can he be sure, on the other hand, that any one
of the Church's doctrines is not from above? Further,
he finds he has to make up his mind what is a corruption,
and what are the tests of it; what he means by a
religion; whether it is obligatory to profess any religion
in particular; what are the standards of truth and
falsehood in religion; and what are the special claims of
the Church.
</p>

<p>
And so, again, as to the minor premiss, perhaps he
will answer, that he is not a Protestant; that he is a
Catholic of the early undivided Church; that he is a
Catholic, but not a Papist. Then he has to determine
questions about division, schism, visible unity, what is
essential, what is desirable; about provisional states; as
to the adjustment of the Church's claims with those of
personal judgment and responsibility; as to the soul of
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
the Church contrasted with the body; as to degrees of
proof, and the degree necessary for his conversion; as
to what is called his providential position, and the
responsibility of change; as to the sincerity of his
purpose to follow the Divine Will, whithersoever it may
lead him; as to his intellectual capacity of investigating
such questions at all.
</p>

<p>
None of these questions, as they come before him,
admit of simple demonstration; but each carries with it
a number of independent probable arguments, sufficient,
when united, for a reasonable conclusion about itself.
And first he determines that the questions are such as he
personally, with such talents or attainments as he has, may
fairly entertain; and then he goes on, after deliberation,
to form a definite judgment upon them; and determines
them, one way or another, in their bearing on the bald
syllogism which was originally offered to his acceptance.
And, we will say, he comes to the conclusion, that he
ought to accept it as true in his case; that he is a
Protestant in such a sense, of such a complexion, of such
knowledge, under such circumstances, as to be called
upon by duty to join the Church; that this is a
conclusion of which he can be certain, and ought to be
certain, and that he will be incurring grave responsibility,
if he does not accept it as certain, and act upon the
certainty of it. And to this conclusion he comes, as
is plain, not by any possible verbal enumeration of all
the considerations, minute but abundant, delicate but
effective, which unite to bring him to it; but by a
mental comprehension of the whole case, and a discernment
of its upshot, sometimes after much deliberation,
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
but, it may be, by a clear and rapid act of the intellect,
always, however, by an unwritten summing-up, something
like the summation of the terms, <hi rend='italic'>plus</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>minus</hi>
of an algebraical series.
</p>

<p>
This I conceive to be the real method of reasoning in
concrete matters; and it has these characteristics:&mdash;First,
it does not supersede the logical form of inference,
but is one and the same with it; only it is no longer an
abstraction, but carried out into the realities of life, its
premisses being instinct with the substance and the
momentum of that mass of probabilities, which, acting
upon each other in correction and confirmation, carry it
home definitely to the individual case, which is its
original scope.
</p>

<p>
Next, from what has been said it is plain, that such
a process of reasoning is more or less implicit, and
without the direct and full advertence of the mind
exercising it. As by the use of our eyesight we recognize
two brothers, yet without being able to express
what it is by which we distinguish them; as at first
sight we perhaps confuse them together, but, on better
knowledge, we see no likeness between them at all; as
it requires an artist's eye to determine what lines and
shades make a countenance look young or old, amiable,
thoughtful, angry or conceited, the principle of discrimination
being in each case real, but implicit;&mdash;so is the
mind unequal to a complete analysis of the motives which
carry it on to a particular conclusion, and is swayed and
determined by a body of proof, which it recognizes only
as a body, and not in its constituent parts.
</p>

<p>
And thirdly, it is plain, that, in this investigation of
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
the method of concrete inference, we have not advanced
one step towards depriving inference of its conditional
character; for it is still as dependent on premisses, as it
is in its elementary idea. On the contrary, we have
rather added to the obscurity of the problem; for a
syllogism is at least a demonstration, when the premisses
are granted, but a cumulation of probabilities, over and
above their implicit character, will vary both in their
number and their separate estimated value, according to
the particular intellect which is employed upon it. It
follows that what to one intellect is a proof is not so to
another, and that the certainty of a proposition does
properly consist in the certitude of the mind which
contemplates it. And this of course may be said
without prejudice to the objective truth or falsehood of
propositions, since it does not follow that these propositions
on the one hand are not true, and based on
right reason, and those on the other not false, and based
on false reason, because not all men discriminate them
in the same way.
</p>

<p>
Having thus explained the view which I would take
of reasoning in the concrete, viz. that, from the nature
of the case, and from the constitution of the human
mind, certitude is the result of arguments which, taken
in the letter, and not in their full implicit sense, are but
probabilities, I proceed to dwell on some instances and
circumstances of a phenomenon which seems to me as
undeniable as to many it may be perplexing.
</p>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<p>
1.
</p>

<p>
Let us take three instances belonging respectively to
the present, the past, and the future.
</p>

<p>
1. We are all absolutely certain, beyond the possibility
of doubt, that Great Britain is an island. We give to
that proposition our deliberate and unconditional adhesion.
There is no security on which we should be
better content to stake our interests, our property, our
welfare, than on the fact that we are living in an island.
We have no fear of any geographical discovery which
may reverse our belief. We should be amused or angry
at the assertion, as a bad jest, did any one say that we
were at this time joined to the main-land in Norway or
in France, though a canal was cut across the isthmus.
We are as little exposed to the misgiving, <q>Perhaps we
are not on an island after all,</q> as to the question, <q>Is it
quite certain that the angle in a semi-circle is a right-angle?</q>
It is a simple and primary truth with us, if
any truth is such; to believe it is as legitimate an
exercise of assent, as there are legitimate exercises of
doubt or of opinion. This is the position of our minds
towards our insularity; yet are the arguments producible
for it (to use the common expression) in black and
white commensurate with this overpowering certitude
about it?
</p>

<p>
Our reasons for believing that we are circumnavigable
are such as these:&mdash;first, we have been so taught in our
childhood, and it is so in all the maps; next, we have
never heard it contradicted or questioned; on the contrary,
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
every one whom we have heard speak on the
subject of Great Britain, every book we have read,
invariably took it for granted; our whole national
history, the routine transactions and current events of
the country, our social and commercial system, our
political relations with foreigners, imply it in one way
or another. Numberless facts, or what we consider
facts, rest on the truth of it; no received fact rests on
its being otherwise. If there is anywhere a junction
between us and the continent, where is it? and how do
we know it? is it in the north or in the south? There
is a manifest <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>reductio
ad absurdum</foreign> attached to the notion
that we can be deceived on such a point as this.
</p>

<p>
However, negative arguments and circumstantial
evidence are not all, in such a matter, which we have a
right to require. They are not the highest kind of
proof possible. Those who have circumnavigated the
island have a right to be certain: have we ever ourselves
even fallen in with any one who has? And as to the
common belief, what is the proof that we are not all of
us believing it on the credit of each other? And then,
when it is said that every one believes it, and everything
implies it, how much comes home to me personally
of this <q>every one</q> and <q>everything</q>? The question
is, Why do I believe it myself? A living statesman is
said to have fancied Demerara an island; his belief was
an impression; have we personally more than an
impression, if we view the matter argumentatively, a
lifelong impression about Great Britain, like the belief,
so long and so widely entertained, that the earth was
immovable, and the sun careered round it? I am not
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
at all insinuating that we are not rational in our
certitude; I only mean that we cannot analyze a proof
satisfactorily, the result of which good sense actually
guarantees to us.
</p>

<p>
2. Father Hardouin maintained that Terence's Plays,
Virgil's <q>Æneid,</q> Horace's Odes, and the Histories of
Livy and Tacitus, were the forgeries of the monks of the
thirteenth century. That he should be able to argue in
behalf of such a position, shows of course that the proof
in behalf of the received opinion is not overwhelming.
That is, we have no means of inferring absolutely,
that Virgil's episode of Dido, or of the Sibyl, and Horace's
<q>Te quoque mensorem</q> and <q>Quem tu Melpomene,</q>
belong to that Augustan age, which owes its celebrity
mainly to those poets. Our common-sense, however,
believes in their genuineness without any hesitation or
reserve, as if it had been demonstrated, and not in proportion
to the available evidence in its favour, or the
balance of arguments.
</p>

<p>
So much at first sight;&mdash;but what are our grounds
for dismissing thus summarily, as we are likely to do, a
theory such as Hardouin's? For let it be observed
first, that all knowledge of the Latin classics comes to us
from the medieval transcriptions of them, and they who
transcribed them had the opportunity of forging or
garbling them. We are simply at their mercy; for
neither by oral transmission, nor by monumental inscriptions,
nor by contemporaneous manuscripts are the
works of Virgil, Horace, and Terence, of Livy and
Tacitus, brought to our knowledge. The existing
copies, whenever made, are to us the autographic
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
originals. Next, it must be considered, that the numerous
religious bodies, then existing over the face of Europe,
had leisure enough, in the course of a century, to
compose, not only all the classics, but all the Fathers
too. The question is, whether they had the ability.
This is the main point on which the inquiry turns, or
at least the most obvious; and it forms one of those
arguments, which, from the nature of the case, are felt
rather than are convertible into syllogisms. Hardouin
allows that the Georgics, Horace's Satires and Epistles,
and the whole of Cicero, are genuine: we have a standard
then in these undisputed compositions of the Augustan
age. We have a standard also, in the extant medieval
works, of what the thirteenth century could do; and we
see at once how widely the disputed works differ from
the medieval. Now could the thirteenth century simulate
Augustan writers better than the Augustan could
simulate such writers as those of the thirteenth? No.
Perhaps, when the subject is critically examined, the
question may be brought to a more simple issue; but as
to our personal reasons for receiving as genuine the
whole of Virgil, Horace, Livy, Tacitus, and Terence,
they are summed up in our conviction that the monks
had not the ability to write them. That is, we take for
granted that we are sufficiently informed about the
capabilities of the human mind, and the conditions of
genius, to be quite sure that an age which was fertile in
great ideas and in momentous elements of the future,
robust in thought, hopeful in its anticipations, of
singular intellectual curiosity and acumen, and of high
genius in at least one of the fine arts, could not, for the
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
very reason of its pre-eminence in its own line, have an
equal pre-eminence in a contrary one. We do not
pretend to be able to draw the line between what the
medieval intellect could or could not do; but we feel
sure that at least it could not write the classics. An
instinctive sense of this, and a faith in testimony, are
the sufficient, but the undeveloped argument on which
to ground our certitude.
</p>

<p>
I will add, that, if we deal with arguments in the mere
letter, the question of the authorship of works in any
case has much difficulty. I have noticed it in the instance
of Shakespeare, and of Newton. We are all
certain that Johnson wrote the prose of Johnson, and
Pope the poetry of Pope; but what is there but prescription,
at least after contemporaries are dead, to
connect together the author of the work and the owner
of the name? Our lawyers prefer the examination of
present witnesses to affidavits on paper; but the tradition
of <q>testimonia,</q> such as are prefixed to the classics and
the Fathers, together with the absence of dissentient
voices, is the adequate groundwork of our belief in the
history of literature.
</p>

<p>
3. Once more: what are my grounds for thinking
that I, in my own particular case, shall die? I am as
certain of it in my own innermost mind, as I am that I
now live; but what is the distinct evidence on which I
allow myself to be certain? how would it tell in a court
of justice? how should I fare under a cross-examination
upon the grounds of my certitude? Demonstration of
course I cannot have of a future event, unless by means
of a Divine Voice; but what logical defence can I make
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
for that undoubting, obstinate anticipation of it, of
which I could not rid myself, if I tried?
</p>

<p>
First, the future cannot be proved
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à posteriori</foreign>; therefore
we are compelled by the nature of the case to put
up with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à priori</foreign>
arguments, that is, with antecedent
probability, which is by itself no logical proof. Men
tell me that there is a law of death, meaning by law a
necessity; and I answer that they are throwing dust into
my eyes, giving me words instead of things. What is a
law but a generalized fact? and what power has the
past over the future? and what power has the case of
others over my own case? and how many deaths have I
seen? how many ocular witnesses have imparted to me
their experience of deaths, sufficient to establish what
is called a law?
</p>

<p>
But let there be a law of death; so there is a law, we
are told, that the planets, if let alone, would severally
fall into the sun&mdash;it is the centrifugal law which hinders
it, and so the centripetal law is never carried out. In
like manner I am not under the law of death alone, I
am under a thousand laws, if I am under one; and they
thwart and counteract each other, and jointly determine
the irregular line, along which my actual history runs,
divergent from the special direction of any one of them.
No law is carried out, except in cases where it acts
freely: how do I know that the law of death will be
allowed its free action in my particular case? We often
are able to avert death by medical treatment: why should
death have its effect, sooner or later, in every case conceivable?
</p>

<p>
It is true that the human frame, in all instances
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
which come before me, first grows, and then declines,
wastes, and decays, in visible preparation for dissolution.
We see death seldom, but of this decline we are witnesses
daily; still, it is a plain fact, that most men who die,
die, not by any law of death, but by the law of disease;
and some writers have questioned whether death is ever,
strictly speaking, natural. Now, are diseases necessary?
is there any law that every one, sooner or later, must
fall under the power of disease? and what would happen
on a large scale, were there no diseases? Is what we
call the law of death anything more than the chance of
disease? Is the prospect of my death, in its logical
evidence,&mdash;as that evidence is brought home to me&mdash;much
more than a high probability?
</p>

<p>
The strongest proof I have for my inevitable mortality
is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>reductio ad
absurdum</foreign>. Can I point to the man,
in historic times, who has lived his two hundred years?
What has become of past generations of men, unless it
is true that they suffered dissolution? But this is a
circuitous argument to warrant a conclusion to which in
matter of fact I adhere so relentlessly. Anyhow, there
is a considerable <q>surplusage,</q> as Locke calls it, of belief
over proof, when I determine that I individually must die.
But what logic cannot do, my own living personal
reasoning, my good sense, which is the healthy condition
of such personal reasoning, but which cannot adequately
express itself in words, does for me, and I am possessed
with the most precise, absolute, masterful certitude of my
dying some day or other.
</p>

<p>
I am led on by these reflections to make another
remark. If it is difficult to explain how a man knows
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
that he shall die, is it not more difficult for him to satisfy
himself how he knows that he was born? His knowledge
about himself does not rest on memory, nor on
distinct testimony, nor on circumstantial evidence. Can
he bring into one focus of proof the reasons which make
him so sure? I am not speaking of scientific men, who
have diverse channels of knowledge, but of an ordinary
individual, as one of ourselves.
</p>

<p>
Answers doubtless may be given to some of these
questions; but, on the whole, I think it is the fact that
many of our most obstinate and most reasonable certitudes
depend on proofs which are informal and personal,
which baffle our powers of analysis, and cannot be brought
under logical rule, because they cannot be submitted to
logical statistics. If we must speak of Law, this recognition
of a correlation between certitude and implicit
proof seems to me a law of our minds.
</p>

<p>
2.
</p>

<p>
I said just now that an object of sense presents itself
to our view as one whole, and not in its separate details:
we take it in, recognize it, and discriminate it from other
objects, all at once. Such too is the intellectual view we
take of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>momenta</foreign>
of proof for a concrete truth; we
grasp the full tale of premisses and the conclusion,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per
modum unius</foreign>,&mdash;by a sort of instinctive perception of the
legitimate conclusion in and through the premisses, not
by a formal juxta-position of propositions; though of
course such a juxta-position is useful and natural, both
to direct and to verify, just as in objects of sight our
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
notice of bodily peculiarities, or the remarks of others
may aid us in establishing a case of disputed identity.
And, as this man or that will receive his own impression
of one and the same person, and judge differently from
others about his countenance, its expression, its moral
significance, its physical contour and complexion, so an
intellectual question may strike two minds very differently,
may awaken in them distinct associations, may be
invested by them in contrary characteristics, and lead
them to opposite conclusions;&mdash;and so, again, a body of
proof, or a line of argument, may produce a distinct,
nay, a dissimilar effect, as addressed to one or to the
other.
</p>

<p>
Thus in concrete reasonings we are in great measure
thrown back into that condition, from which logic proposed
to rescue us. We judge for ourselves, by our own
lights, and on our own principles; and our criterion of
truth is not so much the manipulation of propositions,
as the intellectual and moral character of the person
maintaining them, and the ultimate silent effect of his
arguments or conclusions upon our minds.
</p>

<p>
It is this distinction between ratiocination as the
exercise of a living faculty in the individual intellect,
and mere skill in argumentative science, which is the
true interpretation of the prejudice which exists against
logic in the popular mind, and of the animadversions
which are levelled against it, as that its formulas make
a pedant and a <foreign rend='italic'>doctrinaire</foreign>, that it never makes converts,
that it leads to rationalism, that Englishmen are too
practical to be logical, that an ounce of common-sense
goes farther than many cartloads of logic, that Laputa
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
is the land of logicians, and the like. Such maxims
mean, when analyzed, that the processes of reasoning
which legitimately lead to assent, to action, to certitude,
are in fact too multiform, subtle, omnigenous, too implicit,
to allow of being measured by rule, that they are
after all personal,&mdash;verbal argumentation being useful
only in subordination to a higher logic. It is this which
was meant by the Judge who, when asked for his advice
by a friend, on his being called to important duties
which were new to him, bade him always lay down the
law boldly, but never give his reasons, for his decision
was likely to be right, but his reasons sure to be
unsatisfactory. This is the point which I proceed to
illustrate.
</p>

<p>
1. I will take a question of the present moment.
<q>We shall have a European war, <emph>for</emph> Greece is audaciously
defying Turkey.</q> How are we to test the
validity of the reason, implied, not expressed, in the
word <q>for</q>? Only the judgment of diplomatists,
statesmen, capitalists, and the like, founded on experience,
strengthened by practical and historical knowledge,
controlled by self-interest, can decide the worth of that
<q>for</q> in relation to accepting or not accepting the conclusion
which depends on it. The argument is from
concrete fact to concrete fact. How will mere logical
inferences, which cannot proceed without general and
abstract propositions, help us on to the determination
of this particular case? It is not the case of Switzerland
attacking Austria, or of Portugal attacking Spain,
or of Belgium attacking Prussia, but a case without
parallels. To draw a scientific conclusion, the argument
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
must run somewhat in this way:&mdash;<q>All audacious defiances
of Turkey on the part of Greece must end in a
European war; these present acts of Greece are such:
ergo;</q>&mdash;where the major premiss is more difficult to
accept than the conclusion, and the proof becomes an
<q>obscurum per obscurius.</q> But, in truth, I should not
betake myself to some one universal proposition to defend
my view of the matter; I should determine the
particular case by its particular circumstances, by the
combination of many uncatalogued experiences floating
in my memory, of many reflections, variously produced,
felt rather than capable of statement; and if I had them
not, I should go to those who had. I assent in consequence
of some such complex act of judgment, or from
faith in those who are capable of making it, and practically
syllogism has no part, even verificatory, in the
action of my mind.
</p>

<p>
I take this instance at random in illustration; now
let me follow it up by more serious cases.
</p>

<p>
2. Leighton says, <q>What a full confession do we
make of our dissatisfaction with the objects of our
bodily senses, that in our attempts to express what we
conceive of the best of beings and the greatest of felicities
to be, we describe by the exact contraries of all that
we experience here,&mdash;the one as infinite, incomprehensible,
immutable, &amp;c.; the other as incorruptible, undefiled,
and that passeth not away. At all events, this
coincidence, say rather identity of attributes, is sufficient
to apprise us that, to be inheritors of bliss, we must
become the children of God.</q> Coleridge quotes this
passage, and adds, <q>Another and more fruitful, perhaps
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
more solid, inference from the facts would be, that
there is something in the human mind which makes it
know that in all finite quantity, there is an infinite, in
all measures of time an eternal; that the latter are the
basis, the substance, of the former; and that, as we truly
are only as far as God is with us, so neither can we
truly possess, that is, enjoy our being or any other
real good, but by living in the sense of His holy
presence.<note place='foot'><q>Aids to Reflection,</q> p. 59, ed. 1839.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
What is this an argument for? how few readers will
enter into either premiss or conclusion! and of those
who understand what it means, will not at least some
confess that they understand it by fits and starts, not at
all times? Can we ascertain its force by mood and
figure? Is there any royal road by which we may
indolently be carried along into the acceptance of it?
Does not the author rightly number it among his <q>aids</q>
for our <q>reflection,</q> not instruments for our compulsion?
It is plain that, if the passage is worth anything, we
must secure that worth for our own use by the personal
action of our own minds, or else we shall be only
professing and asserting its doctrine, without having
any ground or right to assert it. And our preparation
for understanding and making use of it will be the
general state of our mental discipline and cultivation,
our own experiences, our appreciation of religious
ideas, the perspicacity and steadiness of our intellectual
vision.
</p>

<p>
3. It is argued by Hume against the actual occurrence
of the Jewish and Christian miracles, that, whereas <q>it
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
is experience only which gives authority to human
testimony, and it is the same experience which assures
us of the laws of nature,</q> therefore, <q>when these two
kinds of experience are contrary</q> to each other, <q>we
are bound to subtract the one from the other;</q> and, in
consequence, since we have no experience of a violation
of natural laws, and much experience of the violation of
truth, <q>we may establish it as a maxim that no human
testimony can have such force as to prove a miracle,
and make it a just foundation for any such system of
religion.</q>
</p>

<p>
I will accept the general proposition, but I resist its
application. Doubtless it is abstractedly more likely
that men should lie than that the order of nature
should be infringed; but what is abstract reasoning to
a question of concrete fact? To arrive at the fact of any
matter, we must eschew generalities, and take things as
they stand, with all their circumstances.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>À priori</foreign>, of
course the acts of men are not so trustworthy as the
order of nature, and the pretence of miracles is in fact
more common than the occurrence. But the question is
not about miracles in general, or men in general, but
definitely, whether these particular miracles, ascribed
to the particular Peter, James, and John, are more
likely to have been or not; whether they are unlikely,
supposing that there is a Power, external to the world,
who can bring them about; supposing they are the only
means by which He can reveal Himself to those who need
a revelation; supposing He is likely to reveal Himself;
that He has a great end in doing so; that the professed
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
miracles in question are like His natural works, and such
as He is likely to work, in case He wrought miracles;
that great effects, otherwise unaccountable, in the event
followed upon the acts said to be miraculous; that they
were from the first accepted as true by large numbers
of men against their natural interests; that the reception
of them as true has left its mark upon the world, as
no other event ever did; that, viewed in their effects,
they have&mdash;that is, the belief of them has&mdash;served to
raise human nature to a high moral standard, otherwise
unattainable: these and the like considerations are parts
of a great complex argument, which so far can be put into
propositions, but which, even between, and around, and
behind these, still is implicit and secret, and cannot by any
ingenuity be imprisoned in a formula, and packed into a
nut-shell. These various conditions may be decided in
the affirmative or in the negative. That is a further
point; here I only insist upon the nature of the argument,
if it is to be philosophical. It must be no smart
antithesis which may look well on paper, but the living
action of the mind on a great problem of fact; and we
must summon to our aid all our powers and resources,
if we would encounter it worthily, and not as if it were
a literary essay.
</p>

<p>
4. <q>Consider the establishment of the Christian
religion,</q> says Pascal in his <q>Thoughts.</q> <q>Here is a
religion contrary to our nature, which establishes itself
in men's minds with so much mildness, as to use no
external force; with so much energy, that no tortures
could silence its martyrs and confessors; and consider
the holiness, devotion, humility of its true disciples;
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
its sacred books, their superhuman grandeur, their
admirable simplicity. Consider the character of its
Founder; His associates and disciples, unlettered men,
yet possessed of wisdom sufficient to confound the ablest
philosopher; the astonishing succession of prophets who
heralded Him; the state at this day of the Jewish people
who rejected Him and His religion; its perpetuity
and its holiness; the light which its doctrines shed upon
the contrarieties of our nature;&mdash;after considering these
things, let any man judge if it be possible to doubt
about its being the only true one.<note place='foot'>Taylor's Translation,
p. 131.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
This is an argument parallel in its character to that
by which we ascribe the classics to the Augustan age.
We urge, that, though we cannot draw the line definitely
between what the monks could do in literature,
and what they could not, anyhow Virgil's <q>Æneid</q>
and the Odes of Horace are far beyond the highest
capacity of the medieval mind, which, however great,
was different in the character of its endowments. And
in like manner we maintain, that, granting that we
cannot decide how far the human mind can advance
by its own unaided powers in religious ideas and sentiments,
and in religious practice, still the facts of Christianity,
as they stand, are beyond what is possible to
man, and betoken the presence of a higher intelligence,
purpose, and might.
</p>

<p>
Many have been converted and sustained in their
faith by this argument, which admits of being powerfully
stated; but still such statement is after all only
intended to be a vehicle of thought, and to open the
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
mind to the apprehension of the facts of the case, and to
trace them and their implications in outline, not to
convince by the logic of its mere wording. Do we not
think and muse as we read it, try to master it as we
proceed, put down the book in which we find it, fill out
its details from our own resources, and then resume the
study of it? And, when we have to give an account of
it to others, should we make use of its language, or even
of its thoughts, and not rather of its drift and spirit?
Has it never struck us what different lights different
minds throw upon the same theory and argument, nay,
how they seem to be differing in detail when they are
professing, and in reality showing, a concurrence in it?
Have we never found, that, when a friend takes up the
defence of what we have written or said, that at first we
are unable to recognize in his statement of it what we
meant it to convey? It will be our wisdom to avail
ourselves of language, as far as it will go, but to aim
mainly by means of it to stimulate, in those to whom
we address ourselves, a mode of thinking and trains of
thought similar to our own, leading them on by their
own independent action, not by any syllogistic compulsion.
Hence it is that an intellectual school will
always have something of an esoteric character; for it is
an assemblage of minds that think; their bond is unity
of thought, and their words become a sort of <hi rend='italic'>tessera</hi>, not
expressing thought, but symbolizing it.
</p>

<p>
Recurring to Pascal's argument, I observe that, its
force depending upon the assumption that the facts of
Christianity are beyond human nature, therefore, according
as the powers of nature are placed at a high or low
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
standard, that force will be greater or less; and that
standard will vary according to the respective dispositions,
opinions, and experiences, of those to whom the
argument is addressed. Thus its value is a personal
question; not as if there were not an objective truth and
Christianity as a whole not supernatural, but that, when
we come to consider where it is that the supernatural
presence is found, there may be fair differences of opinion,
both as to the fact and the proof of what is supernatural.
There is a multitude of facts, which, taken separately,
may perhaps be natural, but, found together, must come
from a source above nature; and what these are, and
how many are necessary, will be variously determined.
And while every inquirer has a right to determine the
question according to the best exercise of his judgment,
still whether he so determine it for himself, or trust in
part or altogether to the judgment of those who have
the best claim to judge, in either case he is guided
by the implicit processes of the reasoning faculty, not
by any manufacture of arguments forcing their way to
an irrefragable conclusion.
</p>

<p>
5. Pascal writes in another place, <q>He who doubts,
but seeks not to have his doubts removed, is at once the
most criminal and the most unhappy of mortals. If,
together with this, he is tranquil and self-satisfied, if he
be vain of his tranquillity, or makes his state a topic of
mirth and self-gratulation, I have not words to describe
so insane a creature. Truly it is to the honour of religion
to have for its adversaries men so bereft of reason;
their opposition, far from being formidable, bears testimony
to its most distinguishing truths; for the great
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
object of the Christian religion is to establish the corruption
of our nature, and the redemption by Jesus
Christ.<note place='foot'>Ibid. pp. 108-110.</note></q>
Elsewhere he says of Montaigne, <q>He involves
everything in such universal, unmingled scepticism, as to
doubt of his very doubts. He was a pure Pyrrhonist.
He ridicules all attempts at certainty in anything.
Delighted with exhibiting in his own person the contradictions
that exist in the mind of a free-thinker, it is
all one to him whether he is successful or not in his
argument. The virtue he loved was simple, sociable,
gay, sprightly, and playful; to use one of his own expressions,
<q>Ignorance and incuriousness are two charming
pillows for a sound head.</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. pp. 429-436.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
Here are two celebrated writers in direct opposition
to each other in their fundamental view of truth and
duty. Shall we say that there is no such thing as truth
and error, but that anything is truth to a man which he
troweth? and not rather, as the solution of a great
mystery, that truth there is, and attainable it is, but
that its rays stream in upon us through the medium of
our moral as well as our intellectual being; and that
in consequence that perception of its first principles
which is natural to us is enfeebled, obstructed, perverted,
by allurements of sense and the supremacy of
self, and, on the other hand, quickened by aspirations
after the supernatural; so that at length two characters
of mind are brought out into shape, and two standards
and systems of thought,&mdash;each logical, when analyzed,
yet contradictory of each other, and only not antagonistic
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
because they have no common ground on which
they can conflict?
</p>

<p>
6. Montaigne was endowed with a good estate, health,
leisure, and an easy temper, literary tastes, and a sufficiency
of books: he could afford thus to play with life,
and the abysses into which it leads us. Let us take
a case in contrast.
</p>

<p>
<q>I think,</q> says the poor dying factory-girl in the
tale, <q>if this should be the end of all, and if all I have
been born for is just to work my heart and life away,
and to sicken in this dree place, with those mill-stones
in my ears for ever, until I could scream out for them
to stop and let me have a little piece of quiet, and with
the fluff filling my lungs, until I thirst to death for one
long deep breath of the clear air, and my mother gone,
and I never able to tell her again how I loved her, and
of all my troubles,&mdash;I think, if this life is the end, and
that there is no God to wipe away all tears from all
eyes, I could go mad!<note place='foot'><q>North and South.</q></note></q>
</p>

<p>
Here is an argument for the immortality of the soul.
As to its force, be it great or small, will it make a figure
in a logical disputation, carried on
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>secundum artem</foreign>?
Can any scientific common measure compel the intellects
of Dives and Lazarus to take the same estimate of it?
Is there any test of the validity of it better than the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipse dixit</foreign>
of private judgment, that is, the judgment
of those who have a right to judge, and next, the agreement
of many private judgments in one and the same
view of it?
</p>

<p>
7. <q>In order to prove plainly and intelligibly,</q> says
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
Dr. Samuel Clarke, <q>that God is a Being, which must
of necessity be endued with perfect knowledge, 'tis to be
observed that knowledge is a perfection, without which
the foregoing attributes are no perfections at all, and
without which those which follow can have no foundation.
Where there is no Knowledge, Eternity and Immensity
are as nothing, and Justice, Goodness, Mercy,
and Wisdom can have no place. The idea of eternity
and omnipresence, devoid of knowledge, is as the notion
of darkness compared with that of light. 'Tis as a
notion of the world without the sun to illuminate it; 'tis
as the notion of inanimate matter (which is the atheist's
supreme cause) compared with that of light and spirit.
And as for the following attributes of Justice, Goodness,
Mercy, and Wisdom, 'tis evident that without
knowledge there could not possibly be any such things
as these at all.<note place='foot'>Serm. xi. init.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
The argument here used in behalf of the Divine Attribute
of Knowledge comes under the general proposition
that the attributes imply each other, for the denial of
one is the denial of the rest. To some minds this thesis
is self-evident; others are utterly insensible to its force.
Will it bear bringing out into words throughout the
whole series of its argumentative links? for if it does,
then either those who maintain it or those who reject it,
the one or the other, will be compelled by logical necessity
to confess that they are in error. <q>God is wise, if
He is eternal; He is good, if He is wise; He is just,
if He is good.</q> What skill can so arrange these propositions,
so add to them, so combine them, that they may
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
be able, by the force of their juxta-position, to follow
one from the other, and become one and the same by an
inevitable correlation. That is not the method by which
the argument becomes a demonstration. Such a method,
used by a Theist in controversy against men who are
unprepared personally for the question, will but issue in
his retreat along a series of major propositions, farther
and farther back, till he and they find themselves in a
land of shadows, <q>where the light is as darkness.</q>
</p>

<p>
To feel the true force of an argument like this, we
must not confine ourselves to abstractions, and merely
compare notion with notion, but we must contemplate
the God of our conscience as a Living Being, as one
Object and Reality, <emph>under</emph> the aspect of this or that
attribute. We must patiently rest in the thought of the
Eternal, Omnipresent, and All-knowing, rather than of
Eternity, Omnipresence, and Omniscience; and we must
not hurry on and force a series of deductions, which, if
they are to be realized, must distil like dew into our
minds, and form themselves spontaneously there, by a
calm contemplation and gradual understanding of their
premisses. Ordinarily speaking, such deductions do not
flow forth, except according as the Image,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide
supr.</hi> ch. v. § 1, pp. 109, 113.</note> presented to
us through conscience, on which they depend, is cherished
within us with the sentiments which, supposing it be, as
we know it is, the truth, it necessarily claims of us, and
is seen reflected, by the habit of our intellect, in the
appointments and the events of the external world.
And, in their manifestation to our inward sense, they
are analogous to the knowledge which we at length
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
attain of the details of a landscape, after we have selected
the right stand-point, and have learned to accommodate
the pupil of our eye to the varying focus necessary for
seeing them; have accustomed it to the glare of light,
have mentally grouped or discriminated lines and shadows
and given them their due meaning, and have mastered
the perspective of the whole. Or they may be compared
to a landscape as drawn by the pencil (unless the illustration
seem forced), in which by the skill of the artist,
amid the bold outlines of trees and rocks, when the eye
has learned to take in their reverse aspects, the forms or
faces of historical personages are discernible, which we
catch and lose again, and then recover, and which some
who look on with us are never able to catch at all.
</p>

<p>
Analogous to such an exercise of sight, must be our
mode of dealing with the verbal expositions of an argument
such as Clarke's. His words speak to those who
understand the speech. To the mere barren intellect
they are but the pale ghosts of notions; but the trained
imagination sees in them the representations of things.
He who has once detected in his conscience the outline
of a Lawgiver and Judge, needs no definition of Him,
whom he dimly but surely contemplates there, and he
rejects the mechanism of logic, which cannot contain in
its grasp matters so real and so recondite. Such a one,
according to the strength and perspicacity of his mind,
the force of his presentiments, and his power of sustained
attention, is able to pronounce about the great Sight
which encompasses him, as about some visible object;
and, in his investigation of the Divine Attributes, is not
inferring abstraction from abstraction, but noting down
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
the aspects and phases of that one thing on which he
ever is gazing. Nor is it possible to limit the depth of
meaning, which at length he will attach to words, which
to the many are but definitions and ideas.
</p>

<p>
Here then again, as in the other instances, it seems
clear, that methodical processes of inference, useful as
they are, as far as they go, are only instruments of
the mind, and need, in order to their due exercise, that
real ratiocination and present imagination which gives
them a sense beyond their letter, and which, while
acting through them, reaches to conclusions beyond and
above them. Such a living <hi rend='italic'>organon</hi> is a personal gift,
and not a mere method or calculus.
</p>

<p>
3.
</p>

<p>
That there are cases, in which evidence, not sufficient
for a scientific proof, is nevertheless sufficient for assent
and certitude, is the doctrine of Locke, as of most men.
He tells us that belief, grounded on sufficient probabilities,
<q>rises to assurance;</q> and as to the question
of sufficiency, that where propositions <q>border near on
certainty,</q> then <q>we assent to them as firmly as if
they were infallibly demonstrated.</q> The only question
is, what these propositions are: this he does not tell us,
but he seems to think that they are few in number, and
will be without any trouble recognized at once by
common-sense; whereas, unless I am mistaken, they are
to be found throughout the range of concrete matter,
and that supra-logical judgment, which is the warrant
for our certitude about them, is not mere common-sense,
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
but the true healthy action of our ratiocinative powers, an
action more subtle and more comprehensive than the mere
appreciation of a syllogistic argument. It is often called
the <q>judicium prudentis viri,</q> a standard of certitude
which holds good in all concrete matter, not only in those
cases of practice and duty, in which we are more familiar
with it, but in questions of truth and falsehood generally,
or in what are called <q>speculative</q> questions, and that,
not indeed to the exclusion, but as the supplement of logic.
Thus a proof, except in abstract demonstration, has always
in it, more or less, an element of the personal, because
<q>prudence</q> is not a constituent part of our nature, but
a personal endowment.
</p>

<p>
And the language in common use, when concrete
conclusions are in question, implies the presence of this
personal element in the proof of them. We are considered
to feel, rather than to see, its cogency; and we decide,
not that the conclusion must be, but that it cannot be
otherwise. We say, that we do not see our way to doubt
it, that it is impossible to doubt, that we are bound to
believe it, that we should be idiots, if we did not believe.
We never should say, in abstract science, that we could
not escape the conclusion that 25 was a mean proportional
between 5 and 125; or that a man had no right to
say that a tangent to a circle at the extremity of the radius
makes an acute angle with it. Yet, though our certitude
of the fact is quite as clear, we should not think it
unnatural to say that the insularity of Great Britain is
as good as demonstrated, or that none but a fool expects
never to die. Phrases indeed such as these are sometimes
used to express a shade of doubt, but it is enough for my
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
purpose if they are also used when doubt is altogether
absent. What, then, they signify, is, what I have so
much insisted on, that we have arrived at these conclusions&mdash;not
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex opere operato</foreign>, by a scientific necessity
independent of ourselves,&mdash;but by the action of our
own minds, by our own individual perception of the
truth in question, under a sense of duty to those conclusions
and with an intellectual conscientiousness.
</p>

<p>
This certitude and this evidence are often called moral;
a word which I avoid, as having a very vague meaning;
but using it here for once, I observe that moral evidence
and moral certitude are all that we can attain, not only
in the case of ethical and spiritual subjects, such as
religion, but of terrestrial and cosmical questions also.
So far, physical Astronomy and Revelation stand on the
same footing. Vince, in his treatise on Astronomy, does
but use the language of philosophical sobriety, when,
after speaking of the proofs of the earth's rotatory
motion, he says, <q>When these reasons, all upon different
principles, are considered, they amount to a proof of the
earth's rotation about its axis, which is as satisfactory
to the mind as the most direct demonstration could be;</q>
or, as he had said just before, <q>the mind rests equally
satisfied, as if the matter was strictly proved.<note place='foot'>Pp. 84,
85.</note></q> That
is, first there is no demonstration that the earth rotates;
next there is a cluster of <q>reasons on <emph>different</emph> principles,</q>
that is, independent probabilities in cumulation;
thirdly, these <q><emph>amount</emph> to a proof,</q> and <q>the mind</q>
feels <q><emph>as if</emph> the matter was strictly proved,</q> that is,
there is the equivalent of proof; lastly, <q>the mind rests
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
<emph>satisfied</emph>,</q> that is, it is certain on the point. And
though evidence of the fact is now obtained which was
not known fifty years ago, that evidence on the whole
has not changed its character.
</p>

<p>
Compare with this avowal the language of Butler,
when discussing the proof of Revelation. <q>Probable
proofs,</q> he says, <q>by being added, not only increase the
evidence, but multiply it. The truth of our religion,
like the truth of common matters, is to be judged by the
whole evidence taken together ... in like manner as,
if in any common case numerous events acknowledged
were to be alleged in proof of any other event disputed,
the truth of the disputed event would be proved, not
only if any one of the acknowledged ones did of itself
clearly imply it, but though no one of them singly did
so, if the whole of the acknowledged events taken
together could not in reason be supposed to have happened,
unless the disputed one were true.<note place='foot'><q>Analogy,</q>
pp. 329, 330, ed. 1836.</note></q> Here, as in
Astronomy, is the same absence of demonstration of the
thesis, the same cumulating and converging indications
of it, the same indirectness in the proof, as being <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per
impossibile</foreign>, the same recognition nevertheless that the
conclusion is not only probable, but true. One other
characteristic of the argumentative process is given,
which is unnecessary in a subject-matter so clear and
simple as astronomical science, viz. the moral state of the
parties inquiring or disputing. They must be <q>as much
in earnest about religion, as about their temporal affairs,
capable of being convinced, on real evidence, that there
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
is a God who governs the world, and feel themselves to
be of a moral nature and accountable creatures.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 278.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
This being the state of the case, the question arises,
whether, granting that the personality (so to speak) of
the parties reasoning is an important element in proving
propositions in concrete matter, any account can be
given of the ratiocinative method in such proofs, over
and above that analysis into syllogism which is possible
in each of its steps in detail. I think there can; though
I fear, lest to some minds it may appear far-fetched or
fanciful; however, I will hazard this imputation. I
consider, then, that the principle of concrete reasoning
is parallel to the method of proof which is the foundation
of modern mathematical science, as contained in the
celebrated lemma with which Newton opens his <q>Principia.</q>
We know that a regular polygon, inscribed in
a circle, its sides being continually diminished, tends to
become that circle, as its limit; but it vanishes before
it has coincided with the circle, so that its tendency to
be the circle, though ever nearer fulfilment, never in fact
gets beyond a tendency. In like manner, the conclusion
in a real or concrete question is foreseen and predicted
rather than actually attained; foreseen in the number
and direction of accumulated premisses, which all converge
to it, and approach it, as the result of their combination,
more nearly than any assignable difference,
yet do not touch it logically, (though only not touching
it,) on account of the nature of its subject-matter, and
the delicate and implicit character of at least part of the
reasonings on which it depends. It is by the strength,
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
variety, or multiplicity of premisses, which are only
probable, not by invincible syllogisms,&mdash;by objections
overcome, by adverse theories neutralized, by difficulties
gradually clearing up, by exceptions proving the
rule, by unlooked-for correlations found with received
truths, by suspense and delay in the process issuing in
triumphant reactions,&mdash;by all these ways, and many
others, the practised and experienced mind is able to
make a sure divination that a conclusion is inevitable,
of which his lines of reasoning do not actually put him
in possession. This is what is meant by a proposition
being <q>as good as proved,</q> a conclusion as undeniable
<q>as if it were proved,</q> and by the reasons for it <q>amounting
to a proof,</q> for a proof is the limit of converging
probabilities.
</p>

<p>
It may be added, that, whereas the logical form of
this argument, is, as I have already observed, indirect,
viz. that <q>the conclusion cannot be otherwise,</q> and
Butler says that an event is proved, if its antecedents
<q>could not in reason be supposed to have happened
<emph>unless</emph> it were true,</q> and law-books tell us that the
principle of circumstantial evidence is the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>reductio ad
absurdum</foreign>, so Newton is forced to the same mode of
proof for the establishment of his lemma, about prime
and ultimate ratios. <q>If you deny that they become
ultimately equal,</q> he says, <q>let them be ultimately
unequal;</q> and the consequence follows, <q>which is
against the supposition.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such being the character of the mental process in
concrete reasoning, I should wish to adduce some good
instances of it in illustration, instances in which the
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
person reasoning confesses that he is reasoning on this
very process, as I have been stating it; but these are
difficult to find, from the very circumstance that the
process from first to last is carried on as much without
words as with them. However, I will set down three
such.
</p>

<p>
1. First, an instance in physics. Wood, treating of
the laws of motion, thus describes the line of reasoning
by which the mind is certified of them. <q rend='pre'>They are not
indeed self-evident, nor do they admit of accurate proof
by experiment, on account of the effects of friction and
the air's resistance, which cannot entirely be removed.
They are, however, constantly and invariably suggested
to our senses, and they agree with experiment, as far as
experiment can go; and the more accurately the experiments
are made, and the greater care we take to remove
all those impediments which tend to render the conclusions
erroneous, the more nearly do the experiments
coincide with these laws.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Their truth is also established upon a different
ground: from these general principles innumerable
particular conclusions have been deducted; sometimes
the deductions are simple and immediate, sometimes
they are made by tedious and intricate operations;
yet they are all, without exception, consistent with
each other and with experiment. It follows thereby,
that the principles upon which the calculations are
founded are true.<note place='foot'><q>Mechanics,</q> p. 31.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
The reasoning of this passage (in which the uniformity
of the laws of nature is assumed) seems to me a good
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
illustration of what must be considered the principle or
form of an induction. The conclusion, which is its
scope, is, by its own confession, not proved; but it
ought to be proved, or is as good as proved, and a man
would be irrational who did not take it to be virtually
proved; first, because the imperfections in the proof arise
out of its subject-matter and the nature of the case, so
that it <emph>is</emph> proved <foreign rend='italic'>interpretativè</foreign>;
and next, because in
the same degree in which these faults in the subject-matter
are overcome here or there, are the involved
imperfections here or there of the proof remedied; and
further, because, when the conclusion is assumed as an
hypothesis, it throws light upon a multitude of collateral
facts, accounting for them, and uniting them together
in one whole. Consistency is not always the guarantee
of truth; but there may be a consistency in a theory so
variously tried and exemplified as to lead to belief in it,
as reasonably as a witness in a court of law may, after a
severe cross-examination, satisfy and assure judge, jury,
and the whole court, of his simple veracity.
</p>

<p>
2. And from the courts of law shall my second illustration
be taken.
</p>

<p>
A learned writer says, <q>In criminal prosecutions, the
circumstantial evidence should be such, as to produce
nearly the same degree of certainty as that which arises
from direct testimony, and to exclude a rational probability
of innocence.<note place='foot'>Phillipps' <q>Law of Evidence,</q> vol.
i. p. 456.</note></q> By degrees of certainty he seems
to mean, together with many other writers, degrees of
proof, or approximations towards proof, and not certitude,
as a state of mind; and he says that no one should be
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
pronounced guilty on evidence which is not equivalent
in weight to direct testimony. So far is clear; but
what is meant by the expression <q><emph>rational</emph> probability</q>?
for there can be no probability but what is rational. I
consider that the <q>exclusion of a rational probability</q>
means <q>the exclusion of any argument in the man's
favour which has a rational claim to be called probable,</q>
or rather, <q>the rational exclusion of any supposition
that he is innocent;</q> and <q>rational</q> is used in contradistinction
to argumentative, and means <q>resting on
implicit reasons,</q> such as we feel, indeed, but which
for some cause or other, because they are too subtle or
too circuitous, we cannot put into words so as to satisfy
logic. If this is a correct account of his meaning, he
says that the evidence against a criminal, in order to be
decisive of his guilt, to the satisfaction of our conscience,
must bear with it, along with the palpable arguments
for that guilt, such a reasonableness, or body of implicit
reasons for it in addition, as may exclude any probability,
really such, that he is not guilty,&mdash;that is, it must be
an evidence free from anything obscure, suspicious, unnatural,
or defective, such as (in the judgment of a prudent
man) to hinder that summation or coalescence of the
evidence into a proof, which I have compared to the
running into a limit, in the case of mathematical ratios.
Just as an algebraical series may be of a nature never to
terminate or admit of valuation, as being the equivalent
of an irrational quantity or surd, so there may be some
grave imperfections in a body of reasons, explicit or
implicit, which is directed to a proof, sufficient to interfere
with its successful issue or resolution, and to
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
balk us with an irrational, that is, an indeterminate,
conclusion.
</p>

<p>
So much as to the principle of conclusions made
upon evidence in criminal cases; now let us turn to an
instance of its application in a particular instance.
Some years ago there was a murder committed, which
unusually agitated the popular mind, and the evidence
against the culprit was necessarily circumstantial. At
the trial the Judge, in addressing the Jury, instructed
them on the kind of evidence necessary for a verdict
of <emph>guilty</emph>. Of course he could not mean to say that
they must convict a man, of whose guilt they were not
certain, especially in a case in which two foreign
countries, Germany and the American States, were
attentively looking on. If the Jury had any doubt,
that is, reasonable doubt, about the man's guilt, of
course they would give him the benefit of that doubt.
Nor could the certitude, which would be necessary for
an adverse verdict, be merely that which is sometimes
called a <q>practical certitude,</q> that is, a certitude indeed,
but a certitude that it was a <q>duty,</q> <q>expedient,</q>
<q>safe,</q> to bring in a verdict of guilty. Of course the
Judge spoke of what is called a <q>speculative certitude,</q>
that is, a certitude of the fact that the man was guilty;
the only question being, what evidence was sufficient for
the proof, for the certitude of that fact. This is what
the Judge meant; and these are among the remarks
which, with this drift, he made upon the occasion:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
After observing that by circumstantial evidence he
meant a case in which <q>the facts do not directly prove
the actual crime, but lead to the conclusion that the
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
prisoner committed that crime,</q> he went on to disclaim
the suggestion, made by counsel in the case, that the
Jury could not pronounce a verdict of <emph>guilty</emph>, unless they
were as much satisfied that the prisoner did the deed as
if they had seen him commit it. <q>That is not the certainty,</q>
he said, <q>which is required of you to discharge
your duty to the prisoner, whose safety is in your hands.</q>
Then he stated what was the <q>degree of certainty,</q> that
is, of certainty or perfection of proof, which was necessary
to the question, <q>involving as it did the life of the
prisoner at the bar,</q>&mdash;it was such as that <q>with which,</q>
he said, <q>you decide upon and conclude your own most
important transactions in life. Take the facts which are
proved before you, separate those you believe from those
which you do not believe, and all the conclusions that
naturally and almost necessarily result from those facts,
you may confide in as much as in the facts themselves.
The case on the part of the prosecution is the <emph>story</emph> of
the murder, told by the <emph>different</emph> witnesses, who <emph>unfold
the circumstances one after another</emph>, according to their
occurrence, together with the <emph>gradual</emph> discovery of some
apparent connexion between the property that was lost,
and the possession of it by the prisoner.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now here I observe, that whereas the conclusion
which is contemplated by the Judge, is what may be
pronounced (on the whole, and considering all things,
and judging reasonably) a proved or certain conclusion,
that is, a conclusion of the truth of the allegation
against the prisoner, or of the fact of his guilt, on
the other hand, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>motiva</foreign>
constituting this reasonable,
rational proof, and this satisfactory certitude, needed not,
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
according to him, to be stronger than those on which
we prudently act on matters of important interest to
ourselves, that is, probable reasons viewed in their convergence
and combination. And whereas the certitude
is viewed by the Judge as following on converging probabilities,
which constitute a real, though only a reasonable,
not an argumentative, proof, so it will be observed
in this particular instance, that, in illustration of the
general doctrine which I have laid down, the process is
one of <q>line upon line, and letter upon letter,</q> of various
details accumulating and of deductions fitting in to each
other; for, in the Judge's words, there was a story&mdash;and
that not told right out and by one witness, but taken up
and handed on from witness to witness&mdash;gradually unfolded,
and tending to a proof, which of course might
have been ten times stronger than it was, but was still a
proof for all that, and sufficient for its conclusion,&mdash;just
as we see that two straight lines are meeting, and are
certain they will meet at a given distance, though we do
not actually see the junction.
</p>

<p>
3. The third instance I will take is one of a literary
character, the divination of the authorship of a certain
anonymous publication, as suggested mainly by internal
evidence, as I find it in a critique written some
twenty years ago. In the extract which I make from
it, we may observe the same steady march of a proof
towards a conclusion, which is (as it were) out of sight;&mdash;a
reckoning, or a reasonable judgment, that the conclusion
really is proved, and a personal certitude upon
that judgment, joined with a confession that a logical
argument could not well be made out for it, and that
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
the various details in which the proof consisted were in
no small measure implicit and impalpable.
</p>

<p>
<q>Rumour speaks uniformly and clearly enough in
attributing it to the pen of a particular individual.
Nor, although a cursory reader might well skim the
book without finding in it anything to suggest, &amp;c., ...
will it appear improbable to the more attentive student
of its internal evidence; and the improbability will
decrease more and more, in proportion as the <emph>reader is
capable</emph> of judging and appreciating the <emph>delicate, and at
first invisible touches</emph>, which limit, to <emph>those who understand
them</emph>, the individuals who can have written it to a very
small number indeed. The utmost scepticism as to
its authorship (<emph>which we do not feel ourselves</emph>) cannot
remove it farther from him than to that of some one
among his most intimate friends; so that, leaving others
to discuss antecedent probabilities,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Here is a writer who professes to have no doubt at all
about the authorship of a book,&mdash;which at the same time
he cannot prove by mere argumentation set down in words.
The reasons of his conviction are too delicate, too intricate;
nay, they are in part invisible; invisible, except
to those who from circumstances have an intellectual
perception of what does not appear to the many. They
are personal to the individual. This again is an instance,
distinctly set before us, of the particular mode in which
the mind progresses in concrete matter, viz. from merely
probable antecedents to the sufficient proof of a fact or
a truth, and, after the proof, to an act of certitude
about it.
</p>

<p>
I trust the foregoing remarks may not deserve the
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
blame of a needless refinement. I have thought it
incumbent on me to illustrate the intellectual process by
which we pass from conditional inference to unconditional
assent; and I have had only the alternative of lying
under the imputation of a paradox or of a subtlety.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 3. Natural Inference.</head>

<p>
I commenced my remarks upon Inference by saying
that reasoning ordinarily shows as a simple act, not as
a process, as if there were no medium interposed between
antecedent and consequent, and the transition from one
to the other were of the nature of an instinct,&mdash;that is,
the process is altogether unconscious and implicit. It
is necessary, then, to take some notice of this natural
or material Inference, as an existing phenomenon of
mind; and that the more, because I shall thereby be
illustrating and supporting what I have been saying
of the characteristics of inferential processes as carried on
in concrete matter, and especially of their being the
action of the mind itself, that is, by its ratiocinative or
illative faculty, not a mere operation as in the rules of
arithmetic.
</p>

<p>
I say, then, that our most natural mode of reasoning
is, not from propositions to propositions, but from things
to things, from concrete to concrete, from wholes to
wholes. Whether the consequents, at which we arrive
from the antecedents with which we start, lead us to
assent or only towards assent, those antecedents commonly
are not recognized by us as subjects for analysis;
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
nay, often are only indirectly recognized as antecedents
at all. Not only is the inference with its process ignored,
but the antecedent also. To the mind itself the reasoning
is a simple divination or prediction; as it literally
is in the instance of enthusiasts, who mistake their own
thoughts for inspirations.
</p>

<p>
This is the mode in which we ordinarily reason,
dealing with things directly, and as they stand, one by
one, in the concrete, with an intrinsic and personal
power, not a conscious adoption of an artificial instrument
or expedient; and it is especially exemplified both
in uneducated men, and in men of genius,&mdash;in those who
know nothing of intellectual aids and rules, and in those
who care nothing for them,&mdash;in those who are either
without or above mental discipline. As true poetry
is a spontaneous outpouring of thought, and therefore
belongs to rude as well as to gifted minds, whereas no
one becomes a poet merely by the canons of criticism,
so this unscientific reasoning, being sometimes a natural,
uncultivated faculty, sometimes approaching to a gift,
sometimes an acquired habit and second nature, has
a higher source than logical rule,&mdash;<q>nascitur, non fit.</q>
When it is characterized by precision, subtlety, promptitude,
and truth, it is of course a gift and a rarity: in
ordinary minds it is biassed and degraded by prejudice,
passion, and self-interest; but still, after all, this divination
comes by nature, and belongs to all of us in a
measure, to women more than to men, hitting or
missing, as the case may be, but with a success on the
whole sufficient to show that there is a method in it,
though it be implicit.
</p>

<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>

<p>
A peasant who is weather-wise may be simply unable
to assign intelligible reasons why he thinks it will be
fine to-morrow; and if he attempts to do so, he may
give reasons wide of the mark; but that will not weaken
his own confidence in his prediction. His mind does not
proceed step by step, but he feels all at once the force of
various combined phenomena, though he is not conscious
of them. Again, there are physicians who excel in the
<emph>diagnosis</emph> of complaints; though it does not follow from
this, that they could defend their decision in a particular
case against a brother physician who disputed it. They
are guided by natural acuteness and varied experience;
they have their own idiosyncratic modes of observing,
generalizing, and concluding; when questioned, they can
but rest on their own authority, or appeal to the future
event. In a popular novel,<note place='foot'><q>Orley Farm.</q></note>
a lawyer is introduced, who
<q>would know, almost by instinct, whether an accused
person was or was not guilty; and he had already perceived
by instinct</q> that the heroine was guilty. <q>I've no
doubt she's a clever woman,</q> he said, and at once named an
attorney practising at the Old Bailey. So, again, experts
and detectives, when employed to investigate mysteries,
in cases whether of the civil or criminal law, discern and
follow out indications which promise solution with a
sagacity incomprehensible to ordinary men. A parallel
gift is the intuitive perception of character possessed by
certain men, while others are as destitute of it, as others
again are of an ear for music. What common measure is
there between the judgments of those who have this intuition,
and those who have not? What but the event can
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
settle any difference of opinion which occurs in their
estimation of a third person? These are instances of a
natural capacity, or of nature improved by practice and
habit, enabling the mind to pass promptly from one set
of facts to another, not only, I say, without conscious
media, but without conscious antecedents.
</p>

<p>
Sometimes, I say, this illative faculty is nothing short
of genius. Such seems to have been Newton's perception
of truths mathematical and physical, though proof was
absent. At least that is the impression left on my own
mind by various stories which are told of him, one of
which was stated in the public papers a few years ago.
<q>Professor Sylvester,</q> it was said, <q>has just discovered
the proof of Sir Isaac Newton's rule for ascertaining the
imaginary roots of equations.... This rule has been a
Gordian-knot among algebraists for the last century
and a half. The proof being wanting, authors became
ashamed at length of advancing a proposition, the evidence
for which rested on no other foundation than belief
in Newton's sagacity.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>,
June 28, 1865.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
Such is the gift of the calculating boys who now and
then make their appearance, who seem to have certain
short-cuts to conclusions, which they cannot explain to
themselves. Some are said to have been able to determine
off-hand what numbers are prime,&mdash;numbers, I
think, up to seven places.
</p>

<p>
In a very different subject-matter, Napoleon supplies
us with an instance of a parallel genius in reasoning,
by which he was enabled to look at things in his own
province, and to interpret them truly, apparently without
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
any ratiocinative media. <q>By long experience,</q>
says Alison, <q>joined to great natural quickness and
precision of eye, he had acquired the power of judging,
with extraordinary accuracy, both of the amount of the
enemy's force opposed to him in the field, and of the
probable result of the movements, even the most complicated,
going forward in the opposite armies.... He
looked around him for a little while with his telescope,
and immediately formed a clear conception of the position,
forces, and intention of the whole hostile array.
In this way he could, with surprising accuracy, calculate
in a few minutes, according to what he could see of
their formation and the extent of the ground which
they occupied, the numerical force of armies of 60,000
or 80,000 men; and if their troops were at all scattered,
he knew at once how long it would require for them to
concentrate, and how many hours must elapse before
they could make their attack.<note place='foot'>History, vol. x. pp. 286, 287.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
It is difficult to avoid calling such clear presentiments
by the name of instinct; and I think they may so be
called, if by instinct be understood, not a natural sense,
one and the same in all, and incapable of cultivation,
but a perception of facts without assignable media
of perceiving. There are those who can tell at once
what is conducive or injurious to their welfare, who are
their friends, who their enemies, what is to happen to
them, and how they are to meet it. Presence of mind,
fathoming of motives, talent for repartee, are instances
of this gift. As to that divination of personal danger
which is found in the young and innocent, we find a
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
description of it in one of Scott's romances, in which
the heroine, <q>without being able to discover what was
wrong either in the scenes of unusual luxury with which
she was surrounded, or in the manner of her hostess,</q> is
said nevertheless to have felt <q>an instinctive apprehension
that all was not right,&mdash;a feeling in the human
mind,</q> the author proceeds to say, <q>allied perhaps to
that sense of danger, which animals exhibit, when placed
in the vicinity of the natural enemies of their race, and
which makes birds cower when the hawk is in the air,
and beasts tremble when the tiger is abroad in the
desert.<note place='foot'><q>Peveril of the Peak.</q></note></q>
</p>

<p>
A religious biography, lately published, affords us an
instance of this spontaneous perception of truth in the
province of revealed doctrine. <q>Her firm faith,</q> says
the Author of the Preface, <q>was so vivid in its character,
that it was almost like an intuition of the entire
prospect of revealed truth. Let an error against faith
be concealed under expressions however abstruse, and
her sure instinct found it out. I have tried this experiment
repeatedly. She might not be able to separate the
heresy by analysis, but she saw, and felt, and suffered
from its presence.<note place='foot'><q>Life of Mother Margaret M. Hallahan,</q>
p. vii.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
And so of the great fundamental truths of religion,
natural and revealed, and as regards the mass of religious
men: these truths, doubtless, may be proved and defended
by an array of invincible logical arguments, but such is
not commonly the method in which those same logical
arguments make their way into our minds. The grounds,
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
on which we hold the divine origin of the Church, and
the previous truths which are taught us by nature&mdash;the
being of a God, and the immortality of the soul&mdash;are
felt by most men to be recondite and impalpable, in proportion
to their depth and reality. As we cannot see
ourselves, so we cannot well see intellectual motives
which are so intimately ours, and which spring up from
the very constitution of our minds; and while we refuse
to admit the notion that religion has not irrefragable
arguments in its behalf, still the attempts to argue, on
the part of an individual <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>hic
et nunc</foreign>, will sometimes only
confuse his apprehension of sacred objects, and subtracts
from his devotion quite as much as it adds to his knowledge.
</p>

<p>
This is found in the case of other perceptions besides
that of faith. It is the case of nature against art: of
course, if possible, nature and art should be combined,
but sometimes they are incompatible. Thus, in the case
of calculating boys, it is said, I know not with what
truth, that to teach them the ordinary rules of arithmetic
is to endanger or to destroy the extraordinary
endowment. And men who have the gift of playing on
an instrument by ear, are sometimes afraid to learn by
rule, lest they should lose it.
</p>

<p>
There is an analogy, in this respect, between Ratiocination
and Memory, though the latter may be exercised
without antecedents or media, whereas the former
requires them in its very idea. At the same time association
has so much to do with memory, that we may
not unfairly consider that memory, as well as reasoning,
depends on certain previous conditions. Writing, as I
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
have already observed, is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>memoria
technica</foreign>, or logic of
memory. Now it will be found, I think, that indispensable
as is the use of letters, still, in fact, we weaken
our memory in proportion as we habituate ourselves to
commit all that we wish to remember to memorandums.
Of course in proportion as our memory is weak or over-burdened,
and thereby treacherous, we cannot help ourselves;
but in the case of men of strong memory in any
particular subject-matter, as in that of dates, all artificial
expedients, from the <q>Thirty days has September,</q> &amp;c.,
to the more formidable formulas which are offered for
their use, are as difficult and repulsive as the natural
exercise of memory is healthy and easy to them; just as
the clear-headed and practical reasoner, who sees conclusions
at a glance, is uncomfortable under the drill of
a logician, being oppressed and hampered, as David in
Saul's armour, by what is intended to be a benefit.
</p>

<p>
I need not say more on this part of the subject.
What is called reasoning is often only a peculiar and
personal mode of abstraction, and so far, like memory,
may be said to exist without antecedents. It is a power
of looking at things in some particular aspect, and of
determining their internal and external relations thereby.
And according to the subtlety and versatility
of their gift, are men able to read what comes before
them justly, variously, and fruitfully. Hence, too, it is,
that in our intercourse with others, in business and
family matters, in social and political transactions, a word
or an act on the part of another is sometimes a sudden
revelation; light breaks in upon us, and our whole
judgment of a course of events, or of an undertaking, is
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
changed. We determine correctly or otherwise, as it
may be; but in either case, by a sense proper to ourselves,
for another may see the objects which we are
thus using, and give them quite a different interpretation,
inasmuch as he abstracts another set of general
notions from those same phenomena which present
themselves to us.
</p>

<p>
What I have been saying of Ratiocination, may be
said of Taste, and is confirmed by the obvious analogy
between the two. Taste, skill, invention in the fine arts&mdash;and
so, again, discretion or judgment in conduct&mdash;are
exerted spontaneously, when once acquired, and could
not give a clear account of themselves, or of their mode
of proceeding. They do not go by rule, though to a
certain point their exercise may be analyzed, and may
take the shape of an art or method. But these parallels
will come before us presently.
</p>

<p>
And now I come to a further peculiarity of this
natural and spontaneous ratiocination. This faculty, as
it is actually found in us, proceeding from concrete to
concrete, belongs to a definite subject-matter, according
to the individual. In spite of Aristotle, I will not allow
that genuine reasoning is an instrumental art; and in
spite of Dr. Johnson, I will assert that genius, as far
as it is manifested in ratiocination, is not equal to all
undertakings, but has its own peculiar subject-matter,
and is circumscribed in its range. No one would for
a moment expect that because Newton and Napoleon
both had a genius for ratiocination, that, in consequence,
Napoleon could have generalized the principle of gravitation,
or Newton have seen how to concentrate a hundred
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
thousand men at Austerlitz. The ratiocinative faculty,
then, as found in individuals, is not a general instrument
of knowledge, but has its province, or is what may be
called departmental. It is not so much one faculty, as
a collection of similar or analogous faculties under one
name, there being really as many faculties as there are
distinct subject-matters, though in the same person some
of them may, if it so happen, be united,&mdash;nay, though
some men have a sort of literary power in arguing in
all subject-matters, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
omni scibili</foreign>, a power extensive,
but not deep or real.
</p>

<p>
This surely is the conclusion, to which we are brought
by our ordinary experience of men. It is almost proverbial
that a hard-headed mathematician may have no
head at all for what is called historical evidence. Successful
experimentalists need not have talent for legal
research or pleading. A shrewd man of business may be
a bad arguer in philosophical questions. Able statesmen
and politicians have been before now eccentric or superstitious
in their religious views. It is notorious how
ridiculous a clever man may make himself, who ventures
to argue with professed theologians, critics, or geologists,
though without positive defects in knowledge of his subject.
Priestley, great in electricity and chemistry, was
but a poor ecclesiastical historian. The Author of the
Minute Philosopher is also the Author of the Analyst.
Newton wrote not only his <q>Principia,</q> but his comments
on the Apocalypse; Cromwell, whose actions
savoured of the boldest logic, was a confused speaker.
In these, and various similar instances, the defect lay,
not so much in an ignorance of facts, as in an inability to
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
handle those facts suitably; in feeble or perverse modes of
abstraction, observation, comparison, analysis, inference,
which nothing could have obviated, but that which was
wanting,&mdash;a specific talent, and a ready exercise of it.
</p>

<p>
I have already referred to the faculty of memory in
illustration; it will serve me also here. We can form
an abstract idea of memory, and call it one faculty,
which has for its subject-matter all past facts of our
personal experience; but this is really only an illusion;
for there is no such gift of universal memory. Of
course we all remember, in a way, as we reason, in all
subject-matters; but I am speaking of remembering
rightly, as I spoke of reasoning rightly. In real fact
memory, as a talent, is not one indivisible faculty, but a
power of retaining and recalling the past in this or that
department of our experience, not in any whatever.
Two memories, which are both specially retentive, may
also be incommensurate. Some men can recite the
canto of a poem, or good part of a speech, after once
reading it, but have no head for dates. Others have
great capacity for the vocabulary of languages, but
recollect nothing of the small occurrences of the day or
year. Others never forget any statement which they
have read, and can give volume and page, but have no
memory for faces. I have known those who could,
without effort, run through the succession of days on
which Easter fell for years back; or could say where
they were, or what they were doing, on a given day, in
a given year; or could recollect accurately the Christian
names of friends and strangers; or could enumerate
in exact order the names on all the shops from Hyde
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
Park Corner to the Bank; or had so mastered the University
Calendar as to be able to bear an examination in
the academical history of any M. A. taken at random.
And I believe in most of these cases the talent, in its
exceptional character, did not extend beyond several
classes of subjects. There are a hundred memories, as
there are a hundred virtues. Virtue is one indeed in the
abstract; but, in fact, gentle and kind natures are not
therefore heroic, and prudent and self-controlled minds
need not be open-handed. At the utmost such virtue is
one only <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in posse</foreign>;
as developed in the concrete, it takes
the shape of species which in no sense imply each other.
</p>

<p>
So is it with Ratiocination; and as we should betake
ourselves to Newton for physical, not for theological
conclusions, and to Wellington for his military experience,
not for statesmanship, so the maxim holds good
generally, <q>Cuique in arte suâ credendum est:</q> or, to
use the grand words of Aristotle, <q>We are bound to
give heed to the undemonstrated sayings and opinions
of the experienced and aged, not less than to demonstrations;
because, from their having the eye of experience,
they behold the principles of things.<note place='foot'>Eth. Nicom. vi.
11, fin.</note></q> Instead of
trusting logical science, we must trust persons, namely,
those who by long acquaintance with their subject have
a right to judge. And if we wish ourselves to share in
their convictions and the grounds of them, we must
follow their history, and learn as they have learned. We
must take up their particular subject as they took it up,
beginning at the beginning, give ourselves to it, depend
on practice and experience more than on reasoning, and
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
thus gain that mental insight into truth, whatever its
subject-matter may be, which our masters have gained
before us. By following this course, we may make ourselves
of their number, and then we rightly lean upon ourselves;
we follow our own moral or intellectual judgment,
but not our skill in argumentation.
</p>

<p>
This doctrine, stated in substance as above by the
great philosopher of antiquity, is more fully expounded
in a passage which he elsewhere quotes from Hesiod.
<q>Best of all is he,</q> says that poet, <q>who is wise by his
own wit; next best he who is wise by the wit of others;
but whoso is neither able to see, nor willing to hear,
he is a good-for-nothing fellow.</q> Judgment then in
all concrete matter is the architectonic faculty; and
what may be called the Illative Sense, or right judgment
in ratiocination, is one branch of it.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. The Illative Sense.</head>

<p>
My object in the foregoing pages has been, not to form
a theory which may account for those phenomena of the
intellect of which they treat, viz. those which characterize
inference and assent, but to ascertain what is the matter
of fact as regards them, that is, when it is that assent is
given to propositions which are inferred, and under what
circumstances. I have never had the thought of an
attempt which would be ambitious in me, and which has
failed in the hands of others, if that attempt may not unfairly
be called unsuccessful, which, though made by the
acutest minds, has not succeeded in convincing opponents.
Especially have I found myself unequal to antecedent
reasonings in the instance of a matter of fact. There are
those, who, arguing <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à
priori</foreign>, maintain, that, since experience
leads by syllogism only to probabilities, certitude is
ever a mistake. There are others, who, while they deny
this conclusion, grant the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à
priori</foreign> principle assumed in the
argument, and in consequence are obliged, in order to
vindicate the certainty of our knowledge, to have recourse
to the hypothesis of intuitions, intellectual forms,
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
and the like, which belong to us by nature, and may be
considered to elevate our experience into something
more than it is in itself. Earnestly maintaining, as I
would, with this latter school of philosophers, the certainty
of knowledge, I think it enough to appeal to the
common voice of mankind in proof of it. That is to be
accounted a normal operation of our nature, which men in
general do actually instance. That is a law of our minds,
which is exemplified in action on a large scale, whether
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à priori</foreign>
it ought to be a law or no. Our hoping is a
proof that hope, as such, is not an extravagance; and
our possession of certitude is a proof that it is not a weakness
or an absurdity to be certain. How it comes about
that we can be certain is not my business to determine;
for me it is sufficient that certitude is felt. This is what
the schoolmen, I believe, call treating a subject
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in facto
esse</foreign>, in contrast with <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
fieri</foreign>. Had I attempted the
latter, I should have been falling into metaphysics; but
my aim is of a practical character, such as that of
Butler in his <hi rend='italic'>Analogy</hi>, with this difference, that he treats
of probability, doubt, expedience, and duty, whereas in
these pages, without excluding, far from it, the question
of duty, I would confine myself to the truth of things,
and to the mind's certitude of that truth.
</p>

<p>
Certitude is a mental state: certainty is a quality of
propositions. Those propositions I call certain, which
are such that I am certain of them. Certitude is not a
passive impression made upon the mind from without,
by argumentative compulsion, but in all concrete questions
(nay, even in abstract, for though the reasoning is
abstract, the mind which judges of it is concrete) it is
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
an active recognition of propositions as true, such as it
is the duty of each individual himself to exercise at the
bidding of reason, and, when reason forbids, to withhold.
And reason never bids us be certain except on an absolute
proof; and such a proof can never be furnished to
us by the logic of words, for as certitude is of the mind,
so is the act of inference which leads to it. Every one
who reasons, is his own centre; and no expedient for
attaining a common measure of minds can reverse this
truth;&mdash;but then the question follows, is there any <emph>criterion</emph>
of the accuracy of an inference, such as may be our warrant
that certitude is rightly elicited in favour of the proposition
inferred, since our warrant cannot, as I have said, be
scientific? I have already said that the sole and final
judgment on the validity of an inference in concrete
matter is committed to the personal action of the ratiocinative
faculty, the perfection or virtue of which I have
called the Illative Sense, a use of the word <q>sense</q>
parallel to our use of it in <q>good sense,</q> <q>common
sense,</q> a <q>sense of beauty,</q> &amp;c.;&mdash;and I own I do not
see any way to go farther than this in answer to the
question. However, I can at least explain my meaning
more fully; and therefore I will now speak, first of the
sanction of the Illative Sense, next of its nature, and
then of its range.
</p>

<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 1. The Sanction of the Illative Sense.</head>

<p>
We are in a world of facts, and we use them; for there
is nothing else to use. We do not quarrel with them,
but we take them as they are, and avail ourselves of
what they can do for us. It would be out of place to
demand of fire, water, earth, and air their credentials, so
to say, for acting upon us, or ministering to us. We call
them elements, and turn them to account, and make the
most of them. We speculate on them at our leisure.
But what we are still less able to doubt about or annul,
at our leisure or not, is that which is at once their
counterpart and their witness, I mean, ourselves. We
are conscious of the objects of external nature, and
we reflect and act upon them, and this consciousness,
reflection, and action we call our rationality. And as
we use the (so called) elements without first criticizing
what we have no command over, so is it much more unmeaning
in us to criticize or find fault with our own
nature, which is nothing else than we ourselves, instead
of using it according to the use of which it ordinarily
admits. Our being, with its faculties, mind and body,
is a fact not admitting of question, all things being of
necessity referred to it, not it to other things.
</p>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<p>
If I may not assume that I exist, and in a particular
way, that is, with a particular mental constitution, I
have nothing to speculate about, and had better let
speculation alone. Such as I am, it is my all; this is
my essential stand-point, and must be taken for granted;
otherwise, thought is but an idle amusement, not worth
the trouble. There is no medium between using my
faculties, as I have them, and flinging myself upon the
external world according to the random impulse of the
moment, as spray upon the surface of the waves, and
simply forgetting that I am.
</p>

<p>
I am what I am, or I am nothing. I cannot think,
reflect, or judge about my being, without starting from
the very point which I aim at concluding. My ideas are
all assumptions, and I am ever moving in a circle. I
cannot avoid being sufficient for myself, for I cannot
make myself anything else, and to change me is to
destroy me. If I do not use myself, I have no other self
to use. My only business is to ascertain what I am, in
order to put it to use. It is enough for the proof of the
value and authority of any function which I possess, to
be able to pronounce that it is natural. What I have to
ascertain is the laws under which I live. My first elementary
lesson of duty is that of resignation to the laws of
my nature, whatever they are; my first disobedience is
to be impatient at what I am, and to indulge an ambitious
aspiration after what I cannot be, to cherish a
distrust of my powers, and to desire to change laws which
are identical with myself.
</p>

<p>
Truths such as these, which are too obvious to be
called irresistible, are illustrated by what we see in
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
universal nature. Every being is in a true sense sufficient
for itself, so as to be able to fulfil its particular
needs. It is a general law that, whatever is found as
a function or an attribute of any class of beings, or is
natural to it, is in its substance suitable to it, and
subserves its existence, and cannot be rightly regarded
as a fault or enormity. No being could endure, of
which the constituent parts were at war with each other.
And more than this; there is that principle of vitality
in every being, which is of a sanative and restorative
character, and which brings all its parts and functions
together into one whole, and is ever repelling and correcting
the mischiefs which befall it, whether from within
or without, while showing no tendency to cast off its
belongings as if foreign to its nature. The brute animals
are found severally with limbs and organs, habits, instincts,
appetites, surroundings, which play together for
the safety and welfare of the whole; and, after all exceptions,
may be said each of them to have, after its own
kind, a perfection of nature. Man is the highest of the
animals, and more indeed than an animal, as having
a mind; that is, he has a complex nature different from
theirs, with a higher aim and a specific perfection; but
still the fact that other beings find their good in the use
of their particular nature, is a reason for anticipating
that to use duly our own is our interest as well as our
necessity.
</p>

<p>
What is the peculiarity of our nature, in contrast with
the inferior animals around us? It is that, though man
cannot change what he is born with, he is a being of
progress with relation to his perfection and characteristic
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
good. Other beings are complete from their first
existence, in that line of excellence which is allotted to
them; but man begins with nothing realized (to use the
word), and he has to make capital for himself by the
exercise of those faculties which are his natural inheritance.
Thus he gradually advances to the fulness of
his original destiny. Nor is this progress mechanical,
nor is it of necessity; it is committed to the personal
efforts of each individual of the species; each of us has
the prerogative of completing his inchoate and rudimental
nature, and of developing his own perfection out
of the living elements with which his mind began to
be. It is his gift to be the creator of his own sufficiency;
and to be emphatically self-made. This is the law of
his being, which he cannot escape; and whatever is
involved in that law he is bound, or rather he is carried
on, to fulfil.
</p>

<p>
And here I am brought to the bearing of these remarks
upon my subject. For this law of progress is carried out
by means of the acquisition of knowledge, of which inference
and assent are the immediate instruments. Supposing,
then, the advancement of our nature, both in ourselves
individually and as regards the human family, is,
to every one of us in his place, a sacred duty, it follows
that that duty is intimately bound up with the right
use of these two main instruments of fulfilling it.
And as we do not gain the knowledge of the law of
progress by any <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à
priori</foreign> view of man, but by looking at
it as the interpretation which is provided by himself on
a large scale in the ordinary action of his intellectual
nature, so too we must appeal to himself, as a fact, and
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
not to any antecedent theory, in order to find what is
the law of his mind as regards the two faculties in
question. If then such an appeal does bear me out in
deciding, as I have done, that the course of inference is
ever more or less obscure, while assent is ever distinct
and definite, and yet that what is in its nature thus
absolute does, in fact follow upon what in outward manifestation
is thus complex, indirect, and recondite, what is
left to us but to take things as they are, and to resign
ourselves to what we find? that is, instead of devising,
what cannot be, some sufficient science of reasoning
which may compel certitude in concrete conclusions, to
confess that there is no ultimate test of truth besides
the testimony born to truth by the mind itself, and
that this phenomenon, perplexing as we may find it,
is a normal and inevitable characteristic of the mental
constitution of a being like man on a stage such as
the world. His progress is a living growth, not a
mechanism; and its instruments are mental acts, not
the formulas and contrivances of language.
</p>

<p>
We are accustomed in this day to lay great stress
upon the harmony of the universe; and we have well
learned the maxim so powerfully inculcated by our own
English philosopher, that in our inquiries into its laws,
we must sternly destroy all idols of the intellect, and
subdue nature by co-operating with her. Knowledge is
power, for it enables us to use eternal principles which
we cannot alter. So also is it in that microcosm, the
human mind. Let us follow Bacon more closely than to
distort its faculties according to the demands of an ideal
optimism, instead of looking out for modes of thought
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
proper to our nature, and faithfully observing them in
our intellectual exercises.
</p>

<p>
Of course I do not stop here. As the structure of the
universe speaks to us of Him who made it, so the laws
of the mind are the expression, not of mere constituted
order, but of His will. I should be bound by them even
were they not His laws; but since one of their very
functions is to tell me of Him, they throw a reflex light
upon themselves, and, for resignation to my destiny, I
substitute a cheerful concurrence in an overruling Providence.
We may gladly welcome such difficulties as
there are in our mental constitution, and in the interaction
of our faculties, if we are able to feel that He
gave them to us, and He can overrule them for us. We
may securely take them as they are, and use them as we
find them. It is He who teaches us all knowledge; and
the way by which we acquire it is His way. He varies
that way according to the subject-matter; but whether
He has set before us in our particular pursuit the way
of observation or of experiment, of speculation or of
research, of demonstration or of probability, whether
we are inquiring into the system of the universe, or
into the elements of matter and of life, or into the
history of human society and past times, if we take
the way proper to our subject-matter, we have His
blessing upon us, and shall find, besides abundant matter
for mere opinion, the materials in due measure of proof
and assent.
</p>

<p>
And especially, by this disposition of things, shall we
learn, as regards religious and ethical inquiries, how
little we can effect, however much we exert ourselves,
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
without that Blessing; for, as if on set purpose, He
has made this path of thought rugged and circuitous
above other investigations, that the very discipline inflicted
on our minds in finding Him, may mould them
into due devotion to Him when He is found. <q>Verily
Thou art a hidden God, the God of Israel, the Saviour,</q>
is the very law of His dealings with us. Certainly we
need a clue into the labyrinth which is to lead us to
Him; and who among us can hope to seize upon the true
starting-points of thought for that enterprise, and upon
all of them, who is to understand their right direction, to
follow them out to their just limits, and duly to estimate,
adjust, and combine the various reasonings in which
they issue, so as safely to arrive at what it is worth any
labour to secure, without a special illumination from
Himself? Such are the dealings of Wisdom with the
elect soul. <q>She will bring upon him fear, and dread,
and trial; and She will torture him with the tribulation
of Her discipline, till She try him by Her laws, and
trust his soul. Then She will strengthen him, and
make Her way straight to him, and give him joy.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 2. The Nature of the Illative Sense.</head>

<p>
It is the mind that reasons, and that controls its own
reasonings, not any technical apparatus of words and
propositions. This power of judging and concluding,
when in its perfection, I call the Illative Sense, and I
shall best illustrate it by referring to parallel faculties,
which we commonly recognize without difficulty.
</p>

<p>
For instance, how does the mind fulfil its function of
supreme direction and control, in matters of duty, social
intercourse, and taste? In all of these separate actions
of the intellect, the individual is supreme, and responsible
to himself, nay, under circumstances, may be justified in
opposing himself to the judgment of the whole world;
though he uses rules to his great advantage, as far as
they go, and is in consequence bound to use them. As
regards moral duty, the subject is fully considered in the
well-known ethical treatises of Aristotle.<note place='foot'>Though
Aristotle, in his Nicomachean Ethics, speaks of φρόνησις as
the virtue of the δοξαστικὸν generally, and as being concerned generally
with contingent matter (vi. 4), or what I have called the concrete, and
of its function being, as regards that matter, ἀληθεύειν τῷ καταφάναι ἢ
ἀποφάναι (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 3), he does not treat of it in that work in its
general relation to truth and the affirmation of truth, but only as it bears upon
τὰ πρακτά.</note> He calls the
faculty which guides the mind in matters of conduct, by
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
the name of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>phronesis</foreign>,
or judgment. This is the directing,
controlling, and determining principle in such matters,
personal and social. What it is to be virtuous, how we
are to gain the just idea and standard of virtue, how we
are to approximate in practice to our own standard, what
is right and wrong in a particular case, for the answers
in fulness and accuracy to these and similar questions,
the philosopher refers us to no code of laws, to no moral
treatise, because no science of life, applicable to the case
of an individual, has been or can be written. Such is
Aristotle's doctrine, and it is undoubtedly true. An
ethical system may supply laws, general rules, guiding
principles, a number of examples, suggestions, landmarks,
limitations, cautions, distinctions, solutions of critical or
anxious difficulties; but who is to apply them to a particular
case? whither can we go, except to the living
intellect, our own, or another's? What is written is too
vague, too negative for our need. It bids us avoid
extremes; but it cannot ascertain for us, according to
our personal need, the golden mean. The authoritative
oracle, which is to decide our path, is something more
searching and manifold than such jejune generalizations
as treatises can give, which are most distinct and clear
when we least need them. It is seated in the mind of
the individual, who is thus his own law, his own teacher,
and his own judge in those special cases of duty which
are personal to him. It comes of an acquired habit,
though it has its first origin in nature itself, and it is
formed and matured by practice and experience; and it
manifests itself, not in any breadth of view, any philosophical
comprehension of the mutual relations of duty
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
towards duty, or any consistency in its teachings, but it
is a capacity sufficient for the occasion, deciding what
ought to be done here and now, by this given person,
under these given circumstances. It decides nothing
hypothetical, it does not determine what a man should
do ten years hence, or what another should do at this
time. It may indeed happen to decide ten years hence
as it does now, and to decide a second case now as it now
decides a first; still its present act is for the present, not
for the distant or the future.
</p>

<p>
State or public law is inflexible, but this mental rule
is not only minute and particular, but has an elasticity,
which, in its application to individual cases, is, as I have
said, not studious to maintain the appearance of consistency.
In old times the mason's rule which was in use
at Lesbos was, according to Aristotle, not of wood or
iron, but of lead, so as to allow of its adjustment to the
uneven surface of the stones brought together for the
work. By such the philosopher illustrates the nature
of equity in contrast with law, and such is that
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>phronesis</foreign>,
from which the science of morals forms its rules, and
receives its complement.
</p>

<p>
In this respect of course the law of truth differs from
the law of duty, that duties change, but truths never;
but, though truth is ever one and the same, and the
assent of certitude is immutable, still the reasonings
which carry us on to truth and certitude are many and
distinct, and vary with the inquirer; and it is not with
assent, but with the controlling principle in inferences
that I am comparing <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>phronesis</foreign>.
It is with this drift
that I observe that the rule of conduct for one man is not
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
always the rule for another, though the rule is always
one and the same in the abstract, and in its principle
and scope. To learn his own duty in his own case, each
individual must have recourse to his own rule; and if
his rule is not sufficiently developed in his intellect for
his need, then he goes to some other living, present
authority, to supply it for him, not to the dead letter
of a treatise or a code. A living, present authority,
himself or another, is his immediate guide in matters
of a personal, social, or political character. In buying
and selling, in contracts, in his treatment of others, in
giving and receiving, in thinking, speaking, doing,
and working, in toil, in danger, in his recreations and
pleasures, every one of his acts, to be praiseworthy,
must be in accordance with this practical sense. Thus
it is, and not by science, that he perfects the virtues of
justice, self-command, magnanimity, generosity, gentleness,
and all others. <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Phronesis</foreign> is the regulating
principle of every one of them.
</p>

<p>
These last words lead me to a further remark. I
doubt whether it is correct, strictly speaking, to consider
this <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>phronesis</foreign> as a general faculty, directing
and perfecting all the virtues at once. So understood, it is
little better than an abstract term, including under it a
circle of analogous faculties, severally proper to the
separate virtues. Properly speaking, there are as many
kinds of <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>phronesis</foreign> as there are virtues; for
the judgment, good sense, or tact which is conspicuous in a man's conduct
in one subject-matter, is not necessarily traceable
in another. As in the parallel cases of memory and
reasoning, he may be great in one aspect of his character,
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
and little-minded in another. He may be exemplary in
his family, yet commit a fraud on the revenue; he may
be just and cruel, brave and sensual, imprudent and
patient. And if this be true of the moral virtues, it
holds good still more fully when we compare what is
called his private character with his public. A good
man may make a bad king; profligates have been great
statesmen, or magnanimous political leaders.
</p>

<p>
So, too, I may go on to speak of the various callings
and professions which give scope to the exercise of great
talents, for these talents also are matured, not by mere
rule, but by personal skill and sagacity. They are as
diverse as pleading and cross-examining, conducting a
debate in Parliament, swaying a public meeting, and
commanding an army; and here, too, I observe that,
though the directing principle in each case is called
by the same name,&mdash;sagacity, skill, tact, or prudence,&mdash;still
there is no one ruling faculty leading to eminence
in all these various lines of action in common, but men
will excel in one of them, without any talent for the rest.
</p>

<p>
The parallel may be continued in the case of the Fine
Arts, in which, though true and scientific rules may be
given, no one would therefore deny that Phidias or
Rafael had a far more subtle standard of taste and a
more versatile power of embodying it in his works, than
any which he could communicate to others in even a
series of treatises. And here again genius is indissolubly
united to one definite subject-matter; a poet
is not therefore a painter, or an architect a musical
composer.
</p>

<p>
And so, again, as regards the useful arts and personal
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
accomplishments, we use the same word <q>skill,</q> but
proficiency in engineering or in ship-building, or again
in engraving, or again in singing, in playing instruments,
in acting, or in gymnastic exercises, is as simply
one with its particular subject-matter, as the human
soul with its particular body, and is, in its own department,
a sort of instinct or inspiration, not an obedience
to external rules of criticism or of science.
</p>

<p>
It is natural, then, to ask the question, why ratiocination
should be an exception to a general law which
attaches to the intellectual exercises of the mind; why
it is held to be commensurate with logical science; and
why logic is made an instrumental art sufficient for
determining every sort of truth, while no one would
dream of making any one formula, however generalized, a
working rule at once for poetry, the art of medicine, and
political warfare?
</p>

<p>
This is what I have to remark concerning the Illative
Sense, and in explanation of its nature and claims; and
on the whole, I have spoken of it in four respects,&mdash;as
viewed in itself, in its subject-matter, in the process it
uses, and in its function and scope.
</p>

<p>
First, viewed in its exercise, it is one and the same in
all concrete matters, though employed in them in different
measures. We do not reason in one way in
chemistry or law, in another in morals or religion; but
in reasoning on any subject whatever, which is concrete,
we proceed, as far indeed as we can, by the logic of
language, but we are obliged to supplement it by the
more subtle and elastic logic of thought; for forms by
themselves prove nothing.
</p>

<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>

<p>
Secondly, it is in fact attached to definite subject-matters,
so that a given individual may possess it in
one department of thought, for instance, history, and
not in another, for instance, philosophy.
</p>

<p>
Thirdly, in coming to its conclusion, it proceeds
always in the same way, by a method of reasoning,
which is the elementary principle of that mathematical
calculus of modern times, which has so wonderfully
extended the limits of abstract science.
</p>

<p>
Fourthly, in no class of concrete reasonings, whether
in experimental science, historical research, or theology,
is there any ultimate test of truth and error in our
inferences besides the trustworthiness of the Illative
Sense that gives them its sanction; just as there is no
sufficient test of poetical excellence, heroic action, or
gentleman-like conduct, other than the particular mental
sense, be it genius, taste, sense of propriety, or the moral
sense, to which those subject-matters are severally committed.
Our duty in each of these is to strengthen and
perfect the special faculty which is its living rule, and
in every case as it comes to do our best. And such also
is our duty and our necessity, as regards the Illative
Sense.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 3. The Range of the Illative Sense.</head>

<p>
Great as are the services of language in enabling us to extend
the compass of our inferences, to test their validity,
and to communicate them to others, still the mind itself
is more versatile and vigorous than any of its works, of
which language is one, and it is only under its penetrating
and subtle action that the margin disappears,
which I have described as intervening between verbal
argumentation and conclusions in the concrete. It
determines what science cannot determine, the limit of
converging probabilities and the reasons sufficient for a
proof. It is the ratiocinative mind itself, and no trick of
art, however simple in its form and sure in operation, by
which we are able to determine that a moving body left
to itself will never stop, and that no man can live
without eating.
</p>

<p>
Nor, again, is it by any diagram that we are able to scrutinize,
sort, and combine the many premisses which must be
first run together before we answer duly a given question.
It is to the living mind that we must look for the means
of using correctly principles of whatever kind, facts or
doctrines, experiences or testimonies, true or probable, and
of discerning what conclusion from these is necessary,
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
suitable, or expedient, when they are taken for granted;
and this, either by means of a natural gift, or from mental
formation and practice and a long familiarity with those
various starting-points. Thus, when Laud said that he
did not see his way to come to terms with the Holy See,
<q>till Rome was other than she was,</q> no Catholic would
admit the sentiment: but any Catholic may understand
that this is just the judgment consistent with Laud's
actual condition of thought and cast of opinions, his
ecclesiastical position, and the existing state of England.
</p>

<p>
Nor, lastly, is an action of the mind itself less necessary
in relation to those first elements of thought which
in all reasoning are assumptions, the principles, tastes,
and opinions, very often of a personal character, which
are half the battle in the inference with which the
reasoning is to terminate. It is the mind itself that
detects them in their obscure recesses, illustrates them,
establishes them, eliminates them, resolves them into
simpler ideas, as the case may be. The mind contemplates
them without the use of words, by a process which
cannot be analyzed. Thus it was that Bacon separated
the physical system of the world from the theological;
thus that Butler connected together the moral system
with the religious. Logical formulas could never have
sustained the reasonings involved in such investigations.
</p>

<p>
Thus the Illative Sense, that is, the reasoning faculty,
as exercised by gifted, or by educated or otherwise well-prepared
minds, has its function in the beginning, middle,
and end of all discussion and inquiry, and in every step
of the process. It is a rule to itself, and appeals to no
judgment beyond its own; and attends upon the whole
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
course of thought from antecedents to consequents, with
a minute diligence and unwearied presence, which is
impossible to a cumbrous apparatus of verbal reasoning,
though, in communicating with others, words are the
only instrument we possess, and a serviceable, though
imperfect instrument.
</p>

<p>
One function indeed there is of Logic, to which I have
referred in the preceding sentence, which the Illative Sense
does not and cannot perform. It supplies no common
measure between mind and mind, as being nothing else
than a personal gift or acquisition. Few there are, as I
said above, who are good reasoners on all subject-matters.
Two men, who reason well each in his own province of
thought, may, one or both of them, fail and pronounce
opposite judgments on a question belonging to some
third province. Moreover, all reasoning being from
premisses, and those premisses arising (if it so happen) in
their first elements from personal characteristics, in which
men are in fact in essential and irremediable variance
one with another, the ratiocinative talent can do no
more than point out where the difference between them
lies, how far it is immaterial, when it is worth while
continuing an argument between them, and when
not.
</p>

<p>
Now of the three main occasions of the exercise of the
Illative Sense, which I have been insisting on, and which
are the measure of its range, the start, the course, and
the issue of an inquiry, I have already, in treating of
Informal Inference, shown the place it holds in the final
resolution of concrete questions. Here then it is left to
me to illustrate its presence and action in relation to
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
the elementary premisses, and, again, to the conduct of an
argument. And first of the latter.
</p>

<p>
1.
</p>

<p>
There has been a great deal written of late years on
the subject of the state of Greece and Rome during the
pre-historic period; let us say before the Olympiads in
Greece, and the war with Pyrrhus in the annals of Rome.
Now, in a question like this, it is plain that the inquirer
has first of all to decide on the point from which he is to
start in the presence of the received accounts; on what
side, from what quarter he is to approach them; on what
principles his discussion is to be conducted; what he is
to assume, what opinions or objections he is summarily
to put aside as nugatory, what arguments, and when, he
is to consider as apposite, what false issues are to be
avoided, when the state of his arguments is ripe for a
conclusion. Is he to commence with absolutely discarding
all that has hitherto been received; or to retain
it in outline; or to make selections from it; or to consider
and interpret it as mythical, or as allegorical; or to
hold so much to be trustworthy, or at least
of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign>
authority, as he cannot actually disprove; or never to
destroy except in proportion as he can construct? Then,
as to the kind of arguments suitable or admissible,
how far are tradition, analogy, isolated monuments and
records, ruins, vague reports, legends, the facts or sayings
of later times, language, popular proverbs, to tell in
the inquiry? what are marks of truth, what of falsehood,
what is probable, what suspicious, what promises well
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
for discriminating facts from fictions? Then, arguments
have to be balanced against each other, and then lastly
the decision is to be made, whether any conclusion at all
can be drawn, or whether any before certain issues are
tried and settled, or whether a probable conclusion or a
certain. It is plain how incessant will be the call here
or there for the exercise of a definitive judgment, how
little that judgment will be helped on by logic, and how
intimately it will be dependent upon the intellectual
complexion of the writer.
</p>

<p>
This might be illustrated at great length, were it
necessary, from the writings of any of those able men,
whose names are so well known in connexion with the
subject I have instanced; such as Niebuhr, Mr. Clinton,
Sir George Lewis, Mr. Grote, and Colonel Mure. These
authors have severally views of their own on the period
of history which they have selected for investigation,
and they are too learned and logical not to know and
to use to the utmost the testimonies by which the facts
which they investigate are to be ascertained. Why
then do they differ so much from each other, whether
in their estimate of those testimonies or of those facts?
Because that estimate is simply their own, coming
of their own judgment; and that judgment coming
of assumptions of their own, explicit or implicit;
and those assumptions spontaneously issuing out
of the state of thought respectively belonging to
each of them; and all these successive processes of
minute reasoning superintended and directed by an
intellectual instrument far too subtle and spiritual to
be scientific.
</p>

<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>

<p>
What was Niebuhr's idea of the office he had undertaken?
I suppose it was to accept what he found in the
historians of Rome, to interrogate it, to take it to pieces,
to put it together again, to re-arrange and interpret it.
Prescription together with internal consistency was to
him the evidence of fact, and if he pulled down he felt
he was bound to build up. Very different is the spirit of
another school of writers, with whom prescription is
nothing, and who will admit no evidence which has not
first proved its right to be admitted. <q>We are able,</q>
says Niebuhr, <q>to trace the history of the Roman
constitution back to the beginning of the Commonwealth,
as accurately as we wish, and even more perfectly than
the history of many portions of the middle ages.</q> But,
<q>we may rejoice,</q> says Sir George Lewis, <q>that the
ingenuity or learning of Niebuhr should have enabled
him to advance many noble hypotheses and conjectures
respecting the form of the early constitution of Rome,
but, unless he can support those hypotheses by sufficient
evidence, they are not entitled to our belief.</q> <q>Niebuhr,</q>
says a writer nearly related to myself, <q>often expresses
much contempt for mere incredulous criticism and negative
conclusions; ... yet wisely to disbelieve is our first
grand requisite in dealing with materials of mixed
worth.</q> And Sir George Lewis again, <q>It may be said
that there is scarcely any of the leading conclusions of
Niebuhr's work which has not been impugned by some
subsequent writer.</q>
</p>

<p>
Again, <q>It is true,</q> says Niebuhr, <q>that the Trojan
war belongs to the region of fable, yet undeniably it has
an historical foundation.</q> But Mr. Grote writes, <q>If
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
we are asked whether the Trojan war is not a legend
... raised upon a basis of truth, ... our answer must
be, that, as the possibility of it cannot be denied,
so neither can the reality of it be affirmed.</q> On the
other hand, Mr. Clinton lays down the general rule,
<q>We may acknowledge as real persons, all those whom
there is no reason for rejecting. The presumption is
in favour of the early tradition, if no argument can be
brought to overthrow it.</q> Thus he lodges the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>onus
probandi</foreign> with those who impugn the received accounts;
but Mr. Grote and Sir George Lewis throw it upon
those who defend them. <q>Historical evidence,</q> says
the latter, <q>is founded on the testimony of credible
witnesses.</q> And again, <q>It is perpetually assumed in
practice, that historical evidence is different in its nature
from other sorts of evidence. This laxity seems to be
justified by the doctrine of taking the best evidence
which can be obtained. The object of [my] inquiry will
be to apply to the early Roman history the same rules of
evidence which are applied by common consent to modern
history.</q> Far less severe is the judgment of Colonel
Mure: <q>Where no positive historical proof is affirmable,
the balance of historical probability must reduce itself very
much to a reasonable indulgence to the weight of national
conviction, and a deference to the testimony of the earliest
native authorities.</q> <q>Reasonable indulgence</q> to popular
belief, <q>deference</q> to ancient tradition, are principles of
writing history abhorrent to the judicial temper of Sir
George Lewis. He considers the words <q>reasonable indulgence</q>
to be <q>ambiguous,</q> and observes that <q>the very
point which cannot be taken for granted, and in which
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
writers differ, is, as to the extent to which contemporary
attestation may be presumed without direct and positive
proof, ... the extent to which the existence of a popular
belief concerning a supposed matter of fact authorizes
the inference that it grew out of authentic testimony.</q>
And Mr. Grote observes to the same effect: <q>The word
<emph>tradition</emph> is an equivocal word, and begs the whole
question. It is tacitly understood to imply a tale
descriptive of some real matter of fact, taking rise at the
time when the fact happened, originally accurate, but
corrupted by oral transmission.</q> And Lewis, who
quotes the passage, adds, <q>This <emph>tacit understanding</emph> is
the key-stone of the whole argument.</q>
</p>

<p>
I am not contrasting these various opinions of able
men, who have given themselves to historical research,
as if it were any reflection on them that they differ from
each other. It is the cause of their differing on which
I wish to insist. Taking the facts by themselves,
probably these authors would come to no conclusion at
all; it is the <q>tacit understandings</q> which Mr. Grote
speaks of, the vague and impalpable notions of <q>reasonableness</q>
on his own side as well as on that of others,
which both make conclusions possible, and are the pledge
of their being contradictory. The conclusions vary with
the particular writer, for each writes from his own point
of view and with his own principles, and these admit of
no common measure.
</p>

<p>
This in fact is their own account of the matter:
<q>The results of speculative historical inquiry,</q> says
Colonel Mure, <q>can rarely amount to more than fair
presumption of the reality of the events in question, as
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
limited to their general substance, not as extending to
their details. Nor can there consequently be expected
in the minds of different inquirers any such unity
regarding the precise degree of reality, as may frequently
exist in respect to events attested by documentary
evidence.</q> Mr. Grote corroborates this decision
by the striking instance of the diversity of existing
opinions concerning the Homeric Poems. <q>Our means
of knowledge,</q> he says, <q>are so limited, that no one
can produce arguments sufficiently cogent to contend
against opposing preconceptions, and it creates a painful
sensation of diffidence, when we read the expressions of
equal and absolute persuasion with which the two
opposite conclusions have both been advanced.</q> And
again, <q>There is a difference of opinion among the best
critics, which is probably not destined to be adjusted,
since so much depends partly upon critical feeling,
partly upon the general reasonings in respect to ancient
epical unity, with which a man sits down to the study.</q>
Exactly so; every one has his own <q>critical feeling,</q>
his antecedent <q>reasonings,</q> and in consequence his
own <q>absolute persuasion,</q> coming in fresh and fresh at
every turn of the discussion; and who, whether stranger
or friend, is to reach and affect what is so intimately
bound up with the mental constitution of each?
</p>

<p>
Hence the categorical contradictions between one
writer and another, which abound. Colonel Mure
appeals in defence of an historical thesis to the <q>fact of
the Hellenic confederacy combining for the adoption of
a common national system of chronology in 776 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></q>
Mr. Grote replies: <q>Nothing is more at variance with
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
my conception,</q>&mdash;he just now spoke of the preconceptions
of others,&mdash;<q>of the state of the Hellenic world in 776
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, than the idea of a combination among all the
members of the race for any purpose, much more for
the purpose of adopting a common national system of
chronology.</q> Colonel Mure speaks of the <q>bigoted
Athenian public;</q> Mr. Grote replies that <q>no public
ever less deserved the epithet of <q>bigoted</q> than the
Athenian,</q> Colonel Mure also speaks of Mr. Grote's
<q>arbitrary hypothesis;</q> and again (in Mr. Grote's words),
of his <q>unreasonable scepticism.</q> He cannot disprove
by mere argument the conclusions of Mr. Grote; he can
but have recourse to a personal criticism. He virtually
says, <q>We differ in our personal view of things.</q> Men
become personal when logic fails; it is their mode of
appealing to their own primary elements of thought,
and their own illative sense, against the principles and
the judgment of another.
</p>

<p>
I have already touched upon Niebuhr's method of
investigation, and Sir George Lewis's dislike of it: it
supplies us with as apposite an instance of a difference in
first principles as is afforded by Mr. Grote and Colonel
Mure. <q>The main characteristic of his history,</q> says
Lewis, <q>is the extent to which he relies upon internal
evidence, and upon the indications afforded by the narrative
itself, independently of the testimony of its truth.</q>
And, <q>Ingenuity and labour can produce nothing but
hypotheses and conjectures, which may be supported by
analogies, but can never rest upon the solid foundation
of proof.</q> And it is undeniable, that, rightly or wrongly,
disdaining the scepticism of the mere critic, Niebuhr
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
does consciously proceed by the high path of divination.
<q>For my own part,</q> he says, <q>I <emph>divine</emph> that, since the
censorship of Fabius and Decius falls in the same year,
that Cn. Flavius became mediator between his own class
and the higher orders.</q> Lewis considers this to be a
process of guessing; and says, <q>Instead of employing
those tests of credibility which are consistently applied
to modern history,</q> Niebuhr, and his followers, and
most of his opponents, <q>attempt to guide their judgment
by the indication of internal evidence, and assume
that the truth is discovered by an occult faculty of historical
divination.</q> Niebuhr defends himself thus:
<q>The real geographer has a tact which determines his
judgment and choice among different statements. He
is able from isolated statements to draw inferences respecting
things that are unknown, which are closely
approximate to results obtained from observation of
facts, and may supply their place. He is able with
limited data to form an image of things which no eyewitness
has described.</q> He applies this to himself.
The principle set forth in this passage is obviously the
same as I should put forward myself; but Sir George
Lewis, though not simply denying it as a principle,
makes little account of it, when applied to historical
research. <q>It is not enough,</q> he says, <q>for an historian
to claim the possession of a retrospective second-sight,
which is denied to the rest of the world&mdash;of a mysterious
doctrine, revealed only to the initiated.</q> And he pronounces,
that <q>the history of Niebuhr has opened more
questions than it has closed, and it has set in motion a
large body of combatants, whose mutual variances are
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
not at present likely to be settled by deference to a
common principle.<note place='foot'>Niebuhr,
<q>Roman History,</q> vol. i. p. 177; vol. iii. pp. 262. 318. 322.
<q>Lectures,</q> vol. iii. App. p. xxii. Lewis, <q>Roman History,</q> vol. i.
pp. 11-17; vol. ii. pp. 489-492. F. W. Newman, <q>Regal Rome,</q>
p. v. Grote, <q>Greece,</q> vol. ii. pp. 67, 68. 218. 630-639. Mure,
<q>Greece,</q> vol. iii. p. 503; vol. iv. p. 318. Clinton, ap. Grote, suprà.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
We see from the above extracts how a controversy,
such as that to which they belong, is carried on from
starting-points, and with collateral aids, not formally
proved, but more or less assumed, the process of assumption
lying in the action of the Illative Sense, as applied
to primary elements of thought respectively congenial
to the disputants. Not that explicit argumentation on
these minute or minor, though important, points is not
sometimes possible to a certain extent; but, as I had
said, it is too unwieldy an expedient for a constantly
recurring need, even when it is tolerably exact.
</p>

<p>
2.
</p>

<p>
And now secondly, as to the first principles themselves.
In illustration, I will mention under separate heads some
of those elementary contrarieties of opinion, on which
the Illative Sense has to act, discovering them, following
them out, defending or resisting them, as the case
may be.
</p>

<p>
1. As to the statement of the case. This depends on
the particular aspect under which we view a subject,
that is, on the abstraction which forms our representative
notion of what it is. Sciences are only so many
distinct aspects of nature; sometimes suggested by
nature itself, sometimes created by the mind. (1) One
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
of the simplest and broadest aspects under which to view
the physical world, is that of a system of final causes,
or, on the other hand, of initial or effective causes.
Bacon, having it in view to extend our power over
nature, adopted the latter. He took firm hold of the
idea of causation (in the common sense of the word) as
contrasted with that of design, refusing to mix up the
two ideas in one inquiry, and denouncing such traditional
interpretations of facts, as did but obscure the
simplicity of the aspect necessary for his purpose. He
saw what others before him might have seen in what
they saw, but who did not see as he saw it. In this
achievement of intellect, which has been so fruitful in
results, lie his genius and his fame.
</p>

<p>
(2) So again, to refer to a very different subject-matter,
we often hear of the exploits of some great lawyer,
judge or advocate, who is able in perplexed cases, when
common minds see nothing but a hopeless heap of facts,
foreign or contrary to each other, to detect the principle
which rightly interprets the riddle, and, to the admiration
of all hearers, converts a chaos into an orderly and
luminous whole. This is what is meant by originality,
in thinking: it is the discovery of an aspect of a subject-matter,
simpler, perhaps, and more intelligible than
any hitherto taken.
</p>

<p>
(3) On the other hand, such aspects are often unreal,
as being mere exhibitions of ingenuity, not of true originality
of mind. This is especially the case in what are
called philosophical views of history. Such seems to me
the theory advocated in a work of great learning,
vigour, and acuteness, Warburton's <q>Divine Legation
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
of Moses.</q> I do not call Gibbon merely ingenious;
still his account of the rise of Christianity is the mere
subjective view of one who could not enter into its depth
and power.
</p>

<p>
(4) The aspect under which we view things is often
intensely personal; nay, even awfully so, considering
that, from the nature of the case, it does not bring
home its idiosyncrasy either to ourselves or to others.
Each of us looks at the world in his own way, and does
not know that perhaps it is characteristically his own. This
is the case even as regards the senses. Some men have
little perception of colours; some recognize one or two;
to some men two contrary colours, as red and green, are
one and the same. How poorly can we appreciate the
beauties of nature, if our eyes discern, on the face of
things, only an Indian-ink or a drab creation!
</p>

<p>
(5) So again, as regards form: each of us abstracts
the relation of line to line in his own personal way,&mdash;as
one man might apprehend a curve as convex, another as
concave. Of course, as in the case of a curve, there may
be a limit to possible aspects; but still, even when we
agree together, it is not perhaps that we learn one from
another, or fall under any law of agreement, but that
our separate idiosyncrasies happen to concur. I fear I
may seem trifling, if I allude to an illustration which
has ever had a great force with me, and that for the
very reason it is so trivial and minute. Children, learning
to read, are sometimes presented with the letters of
the alphabet turned into the figures of men in various
attitudes. It is curious to observe from such representations,
how differently the shape of the letters strikes
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
different minds. In consequence I have continually asked
the question in a chance company, which way certain of
the great letters look, to the right or to the left; and
whereas nearly every one present had his own clear
view, so clear that he could not endure the opposite
view, still I have generally found that one half of
the party considered the letters in question to look to
the left, while the other half thought they looked to the
right.
</p>

<p>
(6) This variety of interpretation in the very elements
of outlines seems to throw light upon other cognate differences
between one man and another. If they look at
the mere letters of the alphabet so differently, we may
understand how it is they form such distinct judgments
upon handwriting; nay, how some men may have a
talent for decyphering from it the intellectual and moral
character of the writer, which others have not. Another
thought that occurs is, that perhaps here lies the explanation
why it is that family likenesses are so variously
recognized, and how mistakes in identity may be dangerously
frequent.
</p>

<p>
(7) If we so variously apprehend the familiar objects
of sense, still more various, we may suppose, are the
aspects and associations attached by us, one with another,
to intellectual objects. I do not say we differ in the
objects themselves, but that we may have interminable
differences as to their relations and circumstances. I
have heard say (again to take a trifling matter) that at
the beginning of this century, it was a subject of serious,
nay, of angry controversy, whether it began with January
1800, or January 1801. Argument, which ought, if
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
in any case, to have easily brought the question to a
decision, was but sprinkling water upon a flame. I am
not clear that, if it could be fairly started now, it would
not lead to similar results; certainly I know those who
studiously withdraw from giving an opinion on the subject,
when it is accidentally mooted, from their experience
of the eager feeling which it is sure to excite in some one
or other who is present. This eagerness can only arise
from an overpowering sense that the truth of the matter
lies in the one alternative, and not in the other.
</p>

<p>
These instances, because they are so casual, suggest
how it comes to pass, that men differ so widely from each
other in religious and moral perceptions. Here, I say
again, it does not prove that there is no objective truth,
because not all men are in possession of it; or that we
are not responsible for the associations which we attach,
and the relations which we assign, to the objects of the
intellect. But this it does suggest to us, that there is
something deeper in our differences than the accident
of external circumstances; and that we need the interposition
of a Power greater than human teaching and
human argument to make our beliefs true and our
minds one.
</p>

<p>
2. Next I come to the implicit assumption of definite
propositions in the first start of a course of reasoning,
and the arbitrary exclusion of others, of whatever kind.
Unless we had the right, when we pleased, of ruling that
propositions were irrelevant or absurd, I do not see how
we could conduct an argument at all; our way would be
simply blocked up by extravagant principles and theories,
gratuitous hypotheses, false issues, unsupported statements,
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
and incredible facts. There are those who have
treated the history of Abraham as an astronomical record,
and have spoken of our Adorable Saviour as the sun in
<hi rend='italic'>Aries</hi>. Arabian Mythology has changed Solomon into a
mighty wizard. Noah has been considered the patriarch
of the Chinese people. The ten tribes have been pronounced
still to live in their descendants, the Red Indians;
or to be the ancestors of the Goths and Vandals, and
thereby of the present European races. Some have conjectured
that the Apollos of the Acts of the Apostles was
Apollonius Tyaneus. Able men have reasoned out,
almost against their will, that Adam was a negro. These
propositions, and many others of various kinds, we should
think ourselves justified in passing over, if we were
engaged in a work on sacred history; and there are
others, on the contrary, which we should assume as true
by our own right and without notice, and without which
we could not set about or carry on our work.
</p>

<p>
(1) However, the right of making assumptions has been
disputed; but, when the objections are examined, I think
they only go to show that we have no right in argument to
make any assumption we please. Thus, in the historical
researches which just now came before us, it seems fair to
say that no testimony should be received, except such as
comes from competent witnesses, while it is not unfair
to urge, on the other side, that tradition, though unauthenticated,
being (what is called) in possession, has
a prescription in its favour, and may,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign>, or
provisionally, be received. Here are the materials of a
fair dispute; but there are writers who seem to have
gone far beyond this reasonable scepticism, laying down
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
as a general proposition that we have no right in philosophy
to make any assumption whatever, and that we
ought to begin with a universal doubt. This, however,
is of all assumptions the greatest, and to forbid assumptions
universally is to forbid this one in particular. Doubt
itself is a positive state, and implies a definite habit of
mind, and thereby necessarily involves a system of principles
and doctrines all its own. Again, if nothing is to
be assumed, what is our very method of reasoning but
an assumption? and what our nature itself? The very
sense of pleasure and pain, which is one of the most
intimate portions of ourselves, inevitably translates itself
into intellectual assumptions.
</p>

<p>
Of the two, I would rather have to maintain that we
ought to begin with believing everything that is offered
to our acceptance, than that it is our duty to doubt of
everything. The former, indeed, seems the true way
of learning. In that case, we soon discover and discard
what is contradictory to itself; and error having always
some portion of truth in it, and the truth having a
reality which error has not, we may expect, that when
there is an honest purpose and fair talents, we shall
somehow make our way forward, the error falling off
from the mind, and the truth developing and occupying
it. Thus it is that the Catholic religion is reached, as
we see, by inquirers from all points of the compass, as if
it mattered not where a man began, so that he had an
eye and a heart for the truth.
</p>

<p>
(2) An argument has been often put forward by unbelievers,
I think by Paine, to this effect, that <q>a revelation,
which is to be received as true, ought to be written on the
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
sun.</q> This appeals to the common-sense of the many
with great force, and implies the assumption of a principle
which Butler, indeed, would not grant, and would
consider unphilosophical, and yet I think something may
be said in its favour. Whether abstractedly defensible
or not, Catholic populations would not be averse,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mutatis
mutandis</foreign>, to admitting it. Till these last centuries, the
Visible Church was, at least to her children, the light of
the world, as conspicuous as the sun in the heavens; and
the Creed was written on her forehead, and proclaimed
through her voice, by a teaching as precise as it was
emphatical; in accordance with the text, <q>Who is she
that looketh forth at the dawn, fair as the moon, bright
as the sun, terrible as an army set in array?</q> It was
not, strictly speaking, a miracle, doubtless; but in its
effect, nay, in its circumstances, it was little less. Of
course I would not allow that the Church fails in this
manifestation of the truth now, any more than in former
times, though the clouds have come over the sun; for
what she has lost in her appeal to the imagination, she
has gained in philosophical cogency, by the evidence of
her persistent vitality. So far is clear, that if Paine's
aphorism has a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign>
force against Christianity,
it owes this advantage to the miserable deeds of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
</p>

<p>
(3) Another conflict of first principles or assumptions,
which have often been implicit on either side, has been
carried through in our day, and relates to the end and
scope of civil society, that is, whether government and
legislation ought to be of a religious character, or not;
whether the state has a conscience; whether Christianity
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
is the law of the land; whether the magistrate,
in punishing offenders, exercises a retributive office or a
corrective; or whether the whole structure of society is
raised upon the basis of secular expediency. The relation
of philosophy and the sciences to theology comes
into the question. The old time-honoured theory
has, during the last forty years, been vigorously contending
with the new; and the new is in the ascendant.
</p>

<p>
(4) There is another great conflict of first principles,
and that among Christians, which has occupied a large
space in our domestic history, during the last thirty or
forty years, and that is the controversy about the Rule of
Faith. I notice it as affording an instance of an assumption
so deeply sunk into the popular mind, that it is a
work of great difficulty to obtain from its maintainers
an acknowledgment that it is an assumption. That
Scripture is the Rule of Faith is in fact an assumption
so congenial to the state of mind and course of thought
usual among Protestants, that it seems to them rather a
truism than a truth. If they are in controversy with
Catholics on any point of faith, they at once ask, <q>Where
do you find it in Scripture?</q> and if Catholics reply, as
they must do, that it is not necessarily in Scripture in
order to be true, nothing can persuade them that such
an answer is not an evasion, and a triumph to themselves.
Yet it is by no means self-evident that all religious
truth is to be found in a number of works, however
sacred, which were written at different times, and did
not always form one book; and in fact it is a doctrine
very hard to prove. So much so, that years ago, when
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
I was considering it from a Protestant point of view,
and wished to defend it to the best of my power, I was
unable to give any better account of it than the following,
which I here quote from its appositeness to my
present subject.
</p>

<p>
<q>It matters not,</q> I said, speaking of the first Protestants,
<q>whether or not they only happened to come
right on what, in a logical point of view, are faulty
premisses. They had no time for theories of any kind;
and to require theories at their hand argues an ignorance
of human nature, and of the ways in which truth is
struck out in the course of life. Common sense, chance,
moral perception, genius, the great discoverers of principles
do not reason. They have no arguments, no
grounds, they see the truth, but they do not know how
they see it; and if at any time they attempt to prove
it, it is as much a matter of experiment with them, as
if they had to find a road to a distant mountain, which
they see with the eye; and they get entangled, embarrassed,
and perchance overthrown in the superfluous
endeavour. It is the second-rate men, though most
useful in their place, who prove, reconcile, finish, and
explain. Probably, the popular feeling of the sixteenth
century saw the Bible to be the Word of God, so as
nothing else is His Word, by the power of a strong
sense, by a sort of moral instinct, or by a happy
augury.<note place='foot'><q>Prophetical Office of the Church,</q> pp.
347, 348, ed. 1837.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
That is, I considered the assumption an act of the
Illative Sense;&mdash;I should now add, the Illative Sense,
acting on mistaken elements of thought.
</p>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<p>
3. After the aspects in which a question is to be viewed,
and the principles on which it is to be considered, come
the arguments by which it is decided; among these are
antecedent reasons, which are especially in point here,
because they are in great measure made by ourselves
and belong to our personal character, and to them I shall
confine myself.
</p>

<p>
Antecedent reasoning, when negative, is safe. Thus
no one would say that, because Alexander's rash heroism
is one of the leading characteristics of his history, therefore
we are justified, except in writing a romance, in
asserting that at a particular time and place, he distinguished
himself by a certain exploit about which history
is altogether silent; but, on the other hand, his notorious
bravery would be almost decisive against any charge
against him of having on a particular occasion acted as
a coward.
</p>

<p>
In like manner, good character goes far in destroying
the force of even plausible charges. There is indeed a
degree of evidence in support of an allegation, against
which reputation is no defence; but it must be singularly
strong to overcome an established antecedent probability
which stands opposed to it. Thus historical
personages or great authors, men of high and pure
character, have had imputations cast upon them, easy to
make, difficult or impossible to meet, which are indignantly
trodden under foot by all just and sensible men,
as being as anti-social as they are inhuman. I need not
add what a cruel and despicable part a husband or a son
would play, who readily listened to a charge against his
wife or his father. Yet all this being admitted, a great
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
number of cases remain which are perplexing, and on
which we cannot adjust the claims of conflicting and
heterogeneous arguments except by the keen and subtle
operation of the Illative Sense.
</p>

<p>
Butler's argument in his <hi rend='italic'>Analogy</hi> is such a presumption
used negatively. Objection being brought against
certain characteristics of Christianity, he meets it by the
presumption in their favour derived from their parallels
as discoverable in the order of nature, arguing that they
do not tell against the Divine origin of Christianity,
unless they tell against the Divine origin of the natural
system also. But he could not adduce it as a positive
and direct proof of the Divine origin of the Christian
doctrines that they had their parallels in nature, or at the
utmost as more than a recommendation of them to the
religious inquirer.
</p>

<p>
Unbelievers use the antecedent argument from the
order of nature against our belief in miracles. Here, if
they only mean that the fact of that system of laws,
by which physical nature is governed, makes it antecedently
improbable that an exception should occur in it,
there is no objection to the argument; but if, as is not
uncommon, they mean that the fact of an established
order is absolutely fatal to the very notion of an exception,
they are using a presumption as if it were a proof.
They are saying,&mdash;What has happened 999 times one
way cannot possibly happen on the 1000th time another
way, <emph>because</emph> what has happened 999 times one way is
likely to happen in the same way on the 1000th. If,
however, they mean that the order of nature constitutes
a physical necessity, and that a law is an unalterable fate,
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
this is to assume the very point in debate, and is much
more than its antecedent probability.
</p>

<p>
Facts cannot be proved by presumptions, yet it is
remarkable that in cases where nothing stronger than
presumption was even professed, scientific men have
sometimes acted as if they thought this kind of argument,
taken by itself, decisive of a fact which was in
debate. In the controversy about the Plurality of worlds,
it has been considered, on purely antecedent grounds, as
far as I see, to be so necessary that the Creator should
have filled with living beings the luminaries which we
see in the sky, and the other cosmical bodies which we
imagine there, that it almost amounts to a blasphemy
to doubt it.
</p>

<p>
Theological conclusions, it is true, have often been
made on antecedent reasoning; but then it must be
recollected that theological reasoning professes to be
sustained by a more than human power, and to be guaranteed
by a more than human authority. It may be
true, also, that conversions to Christianity have often
been made on antecedent reasons; yet, even admitting
the fact, which is not quite clear, a number of antecedent
probabilities, confirming each other, may make it a duty
in the judgment of a prudent man, not only to act as if
a statement were true, but actually to accept and believe
it. This is not unfrequently instanced in our dealings
with others, when we feel it right, in spite of our misgivings,
to oblige ourselves to believe their honesty.
And in all these delicate questions there is constant call
for the exercise of the Illative Sense.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. Inference And Assent In The Matter Of
Religion.</head>

<p>
And now I have completed my review of the second
subject to which I have given my attention in this
Essay, the connexion existing between the intellectual
acts of Assent and Inference, my first being the connexion
of Assent with Apprehension; and as I closed
my remarks upon Assent and Apprehension by applying
the conclusions at which I had arrived to our belief in
the Truths of Religion, so now I ought to speak of its
Evidences, before quitting the consideration of the dependence
of Assent upon Inference. I shall attempt to
do so in this Chapter, not without much anxiety, lest I
should injure so large, momentous, and sacred a subject
by a necessarily cursory treatment.
</p>

<p>
I begin with expressing a sentiment, which is habitually
in my thoughts, whenever they are turned to the
subject of mental or moral science, and which I am as
willing to apply here to the Evidences of Religion as it
properly applies to Metaphysics or Ethics, viz. that in
these provinces of inquiry egotism is true modesty. In
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
religious inquiry each of us can speak only for himself,
and for himself he has a right to speak. His own
experiences are enough for himself, but he cannot speak
for others: he cannot lay down the law; he can only
bring his own experiences to the common stock of psychological
facts. He knows what has satisfied and satisfies
himself; if it satisfies him, it is likely to satisfy
others; if, as he believes and is sure, it is true, it will
approve itself to others also, for there is but one truth.
And doubtless he does find in fact, that, allowing for
the difference of minds and of modes of speech, what
convinces him, does convince others also. There will be
very many exceptions, but these will admit of explanation.
Great numbers of men refuse to inquire at all;
they put the subject of religion aside altogether; others
are not serious enough to care about questions of truth
and duty and to entertain them; and to numbers, from
their temper of mind, or the absence of doubt, or a dormant
intellect, it does not occur to inquire why or what
they believe; many, though they tried, could not do so
in any satisfactory way. This being the case, it causes
no uneasiness to any one who honestly attempts to set
down his own view of the Evidences of Religion, that
at first sight he seems to be but one among many who
are all in opposition to each other. But, however that
may be, he brings together his reasons, and relies on
them, because they are his own, and this is his primary
evidence; and he has a second ground of evidence, in
the testimony of those who agree with him. But his
best evidence is the former, which is derived from his
own thoughts; and it is that which the world has a
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
right to demand of him; and therefore his true sobriety
and modesty consists, not in claiming for his conclusions
an acceptance or a scientific approval which is not to be
found anywhere, but in stating what are personally his
own grounds for his belief in Natural and Revealed Religion,&mdash;grounds
which he holds to be so sufficient, that
he thinks that others do hold them implicitly or in substance,
or would hold them, if they inquired fairly, or
will hold if they listen to him, or do not hold from impediments,
invincible or not as it may be, into which he
has no call to inquire. However, his own business is to
speak for himself. He uses the words of the Samaritans
to their countrywoman, when our Lord had remained
with them for two days, <q>Now we believe, not for thy
saying, for we have heard Him ourselves, and know that
this is indeed the Saviour of the world.</q>
</p>

<p>
In these words it is declared both that the Gospel
Revelation is divine, and that it carries with it the
evidence of its divinity; and this is of course the matter
of fact. However, these two attributes need not have
been united; a revelation might have been really given,
yet given without credentials. Our Supreme Master
might have imparted to us truths which nature cannot
teach us, without telling us that He had imparted them,
as is actually the case now, as regards heathen countries,
into which portions of revealed truth overflow and
penetrate, without their populations knowing whence
those truths came. But the very idea of Christianity in
its profession and history, is something more than this;
it is a <q>Revelatio revelata;</q> it is a definite message
from God to man distinctly conveyed by His chosen
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
instruments, and to be received as such a message; and
therefore to be positively acknowledged, embraced, and
maintained as true, on the ground of its being divine,
not as true on intrinsic grounds, not as probably true,
or partially true, but as absolutely certain knowledge,
certain in a sense in which nothing else can be certain,
because it comes from Him who neither can deceive nor
be deceived.
</p>

<p>
And the whole tenor of Scripture from beginning to
end is to this effect: the matter of revelation is not a
mere collection of truths, not a philosophical view, not
a religious sentiment or spirit, not a special morality,&mdash;poured
out upon mankind as a stream might pour itself
into the sea, mixing with the world's thought, modifying,
purifying, invigorating it;&mdash;but an authoritative
teaching, which bears witness to itself and keeps itself
together as one, in contrast to the assemblage of opinions
on all sides of it, and speaks to all men, as being ever
and everywhere one and the same, and claiming to be
received intelligently, by all whom it addresses, as one
doctrine, discipline, and devotion directly given from
above. In consequence, the exhibition of credentials,
that is, of evidence, that it is what it professes to be, is
essential to Christianity, as it comes to us; for we are
not left at liberty to pick and choose out of its contents
according to our judgment, but must receive it all, as we
find it, if we accept it at all. It is a religion in addition
to the religion of nature; and as nature has an intrinsic
claim upon us to be obeyed and used, so what is over
and above nature, or supernatural, must also bring with
it valid testimonials of its right to demand our homage.
</p>

<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>

<p>
Next, as to its relation to nature. As I have said,
Christianity is simply an addition to it; it does not
supersede or contradict it; it recognizes and depends on
it, and that of necessity: for how possibly can it prove
its claims except by an appeal to what men have
already? be it ever so miraculous, it cannot dispense
with nature; this would be to cut the ground from
under it; for what would be the worth of evidences
in favour of a revelation which denied the authority
of that system of thought, and those courses of
reasoning, out of which those evidences necessarily
grew?
</p>

<p>
And in agreement with this obvious conclusion we
find in Scripture our Lord and His Apostles always
treating Christianity as the completion and supplement
of Natural Religion, and of previous revelations; as when
He says that the Father testified of Him; that not to
know Him was not to know the Father; and as St.
Paul at Athens appeals to the <q>Unknown God,</q> and
says that <q>He that made the world</q> <q>now declareth to
all men to do penance, because He hath appointed a day
to judge the world by the man whom He hath appointed.</q>
As then our Lord and His Apostles appeal
to the God of nature, we must follow them in that
appeal; and, to do this with the better effect, we must
first inquire into the chief doctrines and the grounds of
Natural Religion.
</p>

<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 1. Natural Religion.</head>

<p>
By Religion I mean the knowledge of God, of His
Will, and of our duties towards Him; and there are
three main channels which Nature furnishes for our
acquiring this knowledge, viz. our own minds, the
voice of mankind, and the course of the world, that is, of
human life and human affairs. The informations which
these three convey to us teach us the Being and Attributes
of God, our responsibility to Him, our dependence
on Him, our prospect of reward or punishment, to be
somehow brought about, according as we obey or disobey
Him. And the most authoritative of these three
means of knowledge, as being specially our own, is
our own mind, whose informations give us the rule
by which we test, interpret, and correct what is presented
to us for belief, whether by the universal testimony
of mankind, or by the history of society and of
the world.
</p>

<p>
Our great internal teacher of religion is, as I have
said in an earlier part of this Essay, our
Conscience.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi>, p. 105,
&amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Vide</hi> also Univ. Serm. ii. 7-13.</note>
Conscience is a personal guide, and I use it because
I must use myself; I am as little able to think by
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
any mind but my own as to breathe with another's
lungs. Conscience is nearer to me than any other
means of knowledge. And as it is given to me, so
also is it given to others; and being carried about
by every individual in his own breast, and requiring
nothing besides itself, it is thus adapted for the communication
to each separately of that knowledge which
is most momentous to him individually,&mdash;adapted for
the use of all classes and conditions of men, for high
and low, young and old, men and women, independently
of books, of educated reasoning, of physical knowledge,
or of philosophy. Conscience, too, teaches us, not only
that God is, but what He is; it provides for the mind a
real image of Him, as a medium of worship; it gives us
a rule of right and wrong, as being His rule, and a code
of moral duties. Moreover, it is so constituted that, if
obeyed, it becomes clearer in its injunctions, and wider
in their range, and corrects and completes the accidental
feebleness of its initial teachings. Conscience, then,
considered as our guide, is fully furnished for its office.
I say all this without entering into the question how
far external assistances are in all cases necessary to
the action of the mind, because in fact man does not
live in isolation, but is everywhere found as a member
of society. I am not concerned here with abstract
questions.
</p>

<p>
Now Conscience suggests to us many things about that
Master, whom by means of it we perceive, but its most
prominent teaching, and its cardinal and distinguishing
truth, is that He is our Judge. In consequence, the
special Attribute under which it brings Him before us,
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
to which it subordinates all other Attributes, is that of
justice&mdash;retributive justice. We learn from its informations
to conceive of the Almighty, primarily, not as a
God of Wisdom, of Knowledge, of Power, of Benevolence,
but as a God of Judgment and Justice; as One, who not
simply for the good of the offender, but as an end good
in itself, and as a principle of government, ordains that
the offender should suffer for his offence. If it tells us
anything at all of the characteristics of the Divine
Mind, it certainly tells us this; and, considering that
our shortcomings are far more frequent and important
than our fulfilment of the duties enjoined upon us, and
that of this point we are fully aware ourselves, it follows
that the aspect under which Almighty God is presented
to us by Nature, is (to use a figure) of One who is
angry with us, and threatens evil. Hence its effect is to
burden and sadden the religious mind, and is in contrast
with the enjoyment derivable from the exercise of the
affections, and from the perception of beauty, whether in
the material universe or in the creations of the intellect.
This is that fearful antagonism brought out with such
soul-piercing reality by Lucretius, when he speaks so
dishonourably of what he considers the heavy yoke of
religion, and the <q>æternas pœnas in morte timendum;</q>
and, on the other hand, rejoices in his <q>Alma Venus,</q>
<q>quæ rerum naturam sola gubernas.</q> And we may
appeal to him for the fact, while we repudiate his view
of it.
</p>

<p>
Such being the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign> aspect of religion
which the teachings of Conscience bring before us individually,
in the next place let us consider what are the doctrines,
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
and what the influences of religion, as we find it embodied
in those various rites and devotions which have taken root
in the many races of mankind, since the beginning of
history, and before history, all over the earth. Of these
also Lucretius gives us a specimen; and they accord
in form and complexion with that doctrine about duty
and responsibility, which he so bitterly hates and loathes.
It is scarcely necessary to insist, that wherever Religion
exists in a popular shape, it has almost invariably worn
its dark side outwards. It is founded in one way or
other on the sense of sin; and without that vivid sense
it would hardly have any precepts or any observances.
Its many varieties all proclaim or imply that man is in
a degraded, servile condition, and requires expiation,
reconciliation, and some great change of nature. This
is suggested to us in the many ways in which we are
told of a realm of light and a realm of darkness, of an
elect fold and a regenerate state. It is suggested in the
almost ubiquitous and ever-recurring institution of a
Priesthood; for wherever there is a priest, there is the
notion of sin, pollution, and retribution, as, on the
other hand, of intercession and mediation. Also, still
more directly, is the notion of our guilt impressed upon
us by the doctrine of future punishment, and that
eternal, which is found in mythologies and creeds of such
various parentage.
</p>

<p>
Of these distinct rites and doctrines embodying the
severe side of Natural Religion, the most remarkable is
that of atonement, that is, <q>a substitution of something
offered, or some personal suffering, for a penalty which
would otherwise be exacted;</q> most remarkable, I say,
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
both from its close connexion with the notion of
vicarious satisfaction, and, on the other hand, from its
universality. <q>The practice of atonement,</q> says the
author, whose definition of the word I have just given,
<q>is remarkable for its antiquity and universality, proved
by the earliest records that have come down to us of all
nations, and by the testimony of ancient and modern
travellers. In the oldest books of the Hebrew Scriptures,
we have numerous instances of expiatory rites, where
atonement is the prominent feature. At the earliest
date, to which we can carry our inquiries by means of
the heathen records, we meet with the same notion of
atonement. If we pursue our inquiries through the
accounts left us by the Greek and Roman writers of the
barbarous nations with which they were acquainted,
from India to Britain, we shall find the same notions
and similar practices of atonement. From the most
popular portion of our own literature, our narratives of
voyages and travels, every one, probably, who reads at
all will be able to find for himself abundant proof that
the notion has been as permanent as it is universal.
It shows itself among the various tribes of Africa, the
islanders of the South Seas, and even that most peculiar
race, the natives of Australia, either in the shape of some offering,
or some mutilation of the person.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Penny
Cyclopædia</hi>, art. <q>Atonement</q> (abridged).</note></q>
</p>

<p>
These ceremonial acknowledgments, in so many distinct
forms of worship, of the existing degradation of
the human race, of course imply a brighter, as well as a
threatening aspect of Natural Religion; for why should
men adopt any rites of deprecation or of purification at
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
all, unless they had some hope of attaining to a better
condition than their present? Of this happier side of
religion I will speak presently; here, however, a question
of another kind occurs, viz. whether the notion of
atonement can be admitted among the doctrines of
Natural Religion,&mdash;I mean, on the ground that it is
inconsistent with those teachings of Conscience, which I
have recognized above, as the rule and corrective of
every other information on the subject. If there is any
truth brought home to us by conscience, it is this, that
we are personally responsible for what we do, that we
have no means of shifting our responsibility, and that
dereliction of duty involves punishment; how, it may be
asked, can acts of ours of any kind&mdash;how can even
amendment of life&mdash;undo the past? And if even our
own subsequent acts of obedience bring with them no
promise of reversing what has once been committed,
how can external rites, or the actions of another (as of a
priest), be substitutes for that punishment which is the
connatural fruit and intrinsic development of violation
of the sense of duty? I think this objection avails as
far as this, that amendment is no reparation, and that
no ceremonies or penances can in themselves exercise
any vicarious virtue in our behalf; and that, if they
avail, they only avail in the intermediate season of
probation; that in some way we must make them our
own; and that, when the time comes, which conscience
forebodes, of our being called to judgment, then, at
least, we shall have to stand in and by ourselves, whatever
we shall have by that time become, and must bear our
own burden. But it is plain that in this final account,
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
as it lies between us and our Master, He alone can
decide how the past and the present will stand together
who is our Creator and our Judge.
</p>

<p>
In thus making it a necessary point to adjust the
religions of the world with the intimations of our conscience,
I am suggesting the reason why I confine
myself to such religions as have had their rise in
barbarous times, and do not recognize the religion of
what is called civilization, as having legitimately a part
in the delineation of Natural Religion. It may at first
sight seem strange, that, considering I have laid such
stress upon the progressive nature of man, I should take
my ideas of his religion from his initial, and not his
final testimony about its doctrines; and it may be urged
that the religion of civilized times is quite opposite in
character to the rites and traditions of barbarians, and
has nothing of that gloom and sternness, on which I
have insisted as their characteristic. Thus the Greek
Mythology was for the most part cheerful and graceful,
and the new gods certainly more genial and indulgent
than the old ones. And, in like manner, the religion of
philosophy is more noble and more humane than those
primitive conceptions which were sufficient for early
kings and warriors. But my answer to this objection is
obvious: the progress of which man's nature is capable
is a development, not a destruction of its original state;
it must subserve the elements from which it proceeds, in
order to be a true development and not a perversion.<note place='foot'>On
these various subjects I have written in <q>University Sermons</q>
(Oxford), No. vi. <q>Idea of the University,</q> Disc. viii. <q>History of
Turks,</q> ch. iv. <q>Development of Doctrine,</q> ch. i. sect. 3.</note>
</p>

<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>

<p>
And it does in fact subserve and complete that nature
with which man is born. It is otherwise with the
religion of so-called civilization; such religion does but
contradict the religion of barbarism; and since this
civilization itself is not a development of man's whole
nature, but mainly of the intellect, recognizing indeed
the moral sense, but ignoring the conscience, no wonder
that the religion in which it issues has no sympathy
either with the hopes and fears of the awakened soul, or
with those frightful presentiments which are expressed
in the worship and traditions of the heathen. This
artificial religion, then, has no place in the inquiry;
first, because it comes of a one-sided progress of mind,
and next, for the very reason that it contradicts
informants which speak with greater authority than
itself.
</p>

<p>
Now we come to the third natural informant on the
subject of Religion; I mean the system and the course
of the world. This established order of things, in which
we find ourselves, if it has a Creator, must surely speak
of His will in its broad outlines and its main issues. This
principle being laid down as certain, when we come to
apply it to things as they are, our first feeling is one of
surprise and (I may say) of dismay, that His control of
the world is so indirect, and His action so obscure.
This is the first lesson that we gain from the course of
human affairs. What strikes the mind so forcibly and
so painfully is, His absence (if I may so speak) from
His own world.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide</hi> <q>Apologia,</q>
p. 241.</note> It is a silence that speaks. It is as
if others had got possession of His work. Why does
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
not He, our Maker and Ruler, give us some immediate
knowledge of Himself? Why does He not write His
Moral Nature in large letters upon the face of history,
and bring the blind, tumultuous rush of its events into
a celestial, hierarchical order? Why does He not grant
us in the structure of society at least so much of a
revelation of Himself as the religions of the heathen
attempt to supply? Why from the beginning of time
has no one uniform steady light guided all families of
the earth, and all individual men, how to please Him?
Why is it possible without absurdity to deny His will,
His attributes, His existence? Why does He not walk
with us one by one, as He is said to have walked with
His chosen men of old time? We both see and know
each other; why, if we cannot have the sight of Him,
have we not at least the knowledge? On the contrary,
He is specially <q>a Hidden God;</q> and with our best
efforts we can only glean from the surface of the world
some faint and fragmentary views of Him. I see only a
choice of alternatives in explanation of so critical a
fact:&mdash;either there is no Creator, or He has disowned
His creatures. Are then the dim shadows of His
Presence in the affairs of men but a fancy of our own,
or, on the other hand, has He hid His face and the light
of His countenance, because we have in some special
way dishonoured Him? My true informant, my
burdened conscience, gives me at once the true answer
to each of these antagonist questions:&mdash;it pronounces
without any misgiving that God exists:&mdash;and it pronounces
quite as surely that I am alienated from Him;
that <q>His Hand is not shortened, but that our iniquities
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
have divided between us and our God.</q> Thus it solves
the world's mystery, and sees in that mystery only a
confirmation of its own original teaching.
</p>

<p>
Let us pass on to another great fact of experience,
bearing on Religion, which confirms this testimony both
of conscience and of the forms of worship which prevail
among mankind;&mdash;I mean, the amount of suffering,
bodily and mental, which is our portion in this life.
Not only is the Creator far off, but some being of malignant
nature seems, as I have said, to have got hold of
us, and to be making us his sport. Let us say there are
a thousand millions of men on the earth at this time;
who can weigh and measure the aggregate of pain which
this one generation has endured and will endure from
birth to death? Then add to this all the pain which has
fallen and will fall upon our race through centuries past
and to come. Is there not then some great gulf fixed
between us and the good God? Here again the testimony
of the system of nature is more than corroborated
by those popular traditions about the unseen state, which
are found in mythologies and superstitions, ancient and
modern; for those traditions speak, not only of present
misery, but of pain and evil hereafter, and even without
end. But this dreadful addition is not necessary for the
conclusion which I am here wishing to draw. The real
mystery is, not that evil should never have an end, but
that it should ever have had a beginning. Even a
universal restitution could not undo what had been, or
account for evil being the necessary condition of good.
How are we to explain it, the existence of God being
taken for granted, except by saying that another will,
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
besides His, has had a part in the disposition of His
work, that there is an intractable quarrel, a chronic
alienation, between God and man?
</p>

<p>
I have implied that the laws on which this world is
governed do not go so far as to prove that evil will never
die out of the creation; nevertheless, they look in that
direction. No experience indeed of life can assure us
about the future, but it can and does give us means of
conjecturing what is likely to be; and those conjectures
coincide with our natural forebodings. Experience enables
us to ascertain the moral constitution of man, and thereby
to presage his future from his present. It teaches us,
first, that he is not sufficient for his own happiness, but
is dependent upon the sensible objects which surround
him, and that these he cannot take with him when he
leaves the world; secondly, that disobedience to his sense
of right is even by itself misery, and that he carries that
misery about him, wherever he is, though no divine
retribution followed upon it; and thirdly, that he cannot
change his nature and his habits by wishing, but is
simply himself, and will ever be himself and what he
now is, wherever he is, as long as he continues to be,&mdash;or
at least that pain has no natural tendency to make
him other than he is, and that the longer he lives, the
more difficult he is to change. How can we meet these
not irrational anticipations, except by shutting our eyes,
turning away from them, and saying that we have no
call, no right, to think of them at present, or to make
ourselves miserable about what is not certain, and may
be not true?<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide</hi> <q>Callista,</q>
ch. xix.</note>
</p>

<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>

<p>
Such is the severe aspect of Natural Religion: also it
is the most prominent aspect, because the multitude of
men follow their own likings and wills, and not the
decisions of their sense of right and wrong. To them
Religion is a mere yoke, as Lucretius describes it; not
a satisfaction or refuge, but a terror and a superstition.
However, I must not for an instant be supposed to mean,
that this is its only, its chief, or its legitimate aspect.
All Religion, so far as it is genuine, is a blessing, Natural
as well as Revealed. I have insisted on its severe aspect
in the first place, because, from the circumstances of
human nature, though not by the fault of Religion, such
is the shape in which we first encounter it. Its large
and deep foundation is the sense of sin and guilt, and
without this sense there is for man, as he is, no genuine
religion. Otherwise, it is but counterfeit and hollow;
and that is the reason why this so-called religion of civilization
and philosophy is so great a mockery. However,
true as this judgment is which I pass on philosophical
religion, and troubled as are the existing relations between
God and man, as both the voice of mankind and the
facts of Divine Government testify, equally true are
other general laws which govern those relations, and
they speak another language, and compensate for what
is stern in the teaching of nature, without tending to
deny that sternness.
</p>

<p>
The first of these laws, relieving the aspect of Natural
Religion, is the very fact that religious beliefs and institutions,
of some kind or other, are of such general acceptance
in all times and places. Why should men subject
themselves to the tyranny which Lucretius denounces,
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
unless they had either experience or hope of benefits to
themselves by so doing? Though it be mere hope of
benefits, that alone is a great alleviation of the gloom
and misery which their religious rites presuppose or
occasion; for thereby they have a prospect, more or less
clear, of some happier state in reserve for them, or at
least the chances of it. If they simply despaired of their
fortunes, they would not care about religion. And hope
of future good, as we know, sweetens all suffering.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, they have an earnest of that future in the
real and recurring blessings of life, the enjoyment of the
gifts of the earth, and of domestic affection and social intercourse,
which is sufficient to touch and to subdue even
the most guilty of men in his better moments, reminding
him that he is not utterly cast off by Him whom nevertheless
he is not given to know. Or, in the Apostle's
words, though the Creator once <q>suffered all nations to
walk in their own ways,</q> still, <q>He left not Himself
without testimony, doing good from heaven, giving rains
and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness.</q>
</p>

<p>
Nor are these blessings of physical nature the only
tokens in the Divine System, which in that heathen
time, and indeed in every age, bring home to our experience
the fact of a Good God, in spite of the tumult
and confusion of the world. It is possible to give an
interpretation to the course of things, by which every
event or occurrence in its order becomes providential:
and though that interpretation does not hold good
unless the world is contemplated from a particular point
of view, in one given aspect, and with certain inward
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
experiences, and personal first principles and judgments,
yet these may be fairly pronounced to be common conditions
of human thought, that is, till they are wilfully or
accidentally lost; and they issue in fact, in leading the
great majority of men to recognize the Hand of unseen
power, directing in mercy or in judgment the physical and
moral system. In the prominent events of the world, past
and contemporary, the fate, evil or happy, of great men,
the rise and fall of states, popular revolutions, decisive
battles, the migration of races, the replenishing of the
earth, earthquakes and pestilences, critical discoveries
and inventions, the history of philosophy, the advancement
of knowledge, in these the spontaneous piety of
the human mind discerns a Divine Supervision. Nay,
there is a general feeling, originating directly in the workings
of conscience, that a similar governance is extended
over the persons of individuals, who thereby both fulfil the
purposes and receive the just recompenses of an Omnipotent
Providence. Good to the good, and evil to the
evil, is instinctively felt to be, even from what we see,
amid whatever obscurity and confusion, the universal
rule of God's dealings with us. Hence come the great
proverbs, indigenous in both Christian and heathen
nations, that punishment is sure, though slow, that
murder will out, that treason never prospers, that pride
will have a fall, that honesty is the best policy, and that
curses fall on the heads of those who utter them. To
the unsophisticated apprehension of the many, the successive
passages of life, social or political, are so many
miracles, if that is to be accounted miraculous which
brings before them the immediate Divine Presence; and
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
should it be objected that this is an illogical exercise of
reason, I answer, that since it actually brings them to a
right conclusion, and was intended to bring them to it,
if logic finds fault with it, so much the worse for logic.
</p>

<p>
Again, prayer is essential to religion, and, where
prayer is, there is a natural relief and solace in all
trouble, great or ordinary: now prayer is not less
general in mankind at large than is faith in Providence.
It has ever been in use, both as a personal and as a
social practice. Here again, if, in order to determine
what the Religion of Nature is, we may justly have
recourse to the spontaneous acts and proceedings of our
race, as viewed on a large field, we may safely say that
prayer, as well as hope, is a constituent of man's religion.
Nor is it a fair objection to this argument, to
say that such prayers and rites as have obtained in
various places and times, are in their character, object,
and scope inconsistent with each other; because their
contrarieties do not come into the idea of religion, as
such, at all, and the very fact of their discordance
destroys their right to be taken into account, so far as
they are discordant; for what is not universal has no
claim to be considered natural, right, or of divine origin.
Thus we may determine prayer to be part of Natural
Religion, from such instances of the usage as are supplied
by the priests of Baal and by dancing Dervishes,
without therefore including in our notions of prayer the
frantic excesses of the one, or the artistic spinning of the
other, or sanctioning their respective objects of belief,
Baal or Mahomet.
</p>

<p>
As prayer is the voice of man to God, so Revelation is
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
the voice of God to man. Accordingly, it is another
alleviation of the darkness and distress which weigh
upon the religions of the world, that in one way or
other such religions are founded on some idea of express
revelation, coming from the unseen agents whose anger
they deprecate; nay, that the very rites and observances,
by which they hope to gain the favour of these beings,
are by these beings themselves communicated and
appointed. The Religion of Nature is not a deduction
of reason, or the joint, voluntary manifesto of a multitude
meeting together and pledging themselves to each
other, as men move resolutions now for some political or
social purpose, but it is a tradition or an interposition
vouchsafed to a people from above. To such an interposition
men even ascribed their civil polity or citizenship,
which did not originate in any plebiscite, but in
<foreign rend='italic'>dii minores</foreign> or heroes, was inaugurated with portents or
palladia, and protected and prospered by oracles and
auguries. Here is an evidence, too, how congenial the
notion of a revelation is to the human mind, so that the
expectation of it may truly be considered an integral
part of Natural Religion.
</p>

<p>
Among the observances imposed by these professed
revelations, none is more remarkable, or more general,
than the rite of sacrifice, in which guilt was removed or
blessing gained by an offering, which availed instead of
the merits of the offerer. This, too, as well as the notion
of divine interpositions, may be considered almost an
integral part of the Religion of Nature, and an alleviation
of its gloom. But it does not stand by itself; I have already
spoken of the doctrine of atonement, under which it
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
falls, and which, if what is universal is natural, enters
into the idea of religious service. And what the nature
of man suggests, the providential system of the world
sanctions by enforcing. It is the law, or the permission,
given to our whole race, to use the Apostle's words,
to <q>bear one another's burdens;</q> and this, as I said
when on the subject of Atonement, is quite consistent
with his antithesis that <q>every one must bear his own
burden.</q> The final burden of responsibility when we
are called to judgment is our own; but among the
media by which we are prepared for that judgment are
the exertions and pains taken in our behalf by others.
On this vicarious principle, by which we appropriate to
ourselves what others do for us, the whole structure of
society is raised. Parents work and endure pain, that their
children may prosper; children suffer for the sin of their
parents, who have died before it bore fruit. <q>Delirant
reges, plectuntur Achivi.</q> Sometimes it is a compulsory,
sometimes a willing mediation. The punishment which
is earned by the husband falls upon the wife; the benefits
in which all classes partake are wrought out by the
unhealthy or dangerous toil of the few. Soldiers endure
wounds and death for those who sit at home; and ministers
of state fall victims to their zeal for their countrymen,
who do little else than criticize their actions. And so in
some measure or way this law embraces all of us. We
all suffer for each other, and gain by each other's
sufferings; for man never stands alone here, though he
will stand by himself one day hereafter; but here he is
a social being, and goes forward to his long home as
one of a large company.
</p>

<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>

<p>
Butler, it need scarcely be said, is the great master of
this doctrine, as it is brought out in the system of nature.
In answer to the objection to the Christian doctrine of
satisfaction, that it <q>represents God as indifferent
whether He punishes the innocent or the guilty,</q> he
observes that <q>the world is a constitution or system,
whose parts have a mutual reference to each other; and
that there is a scheme of things gradually carrying on,
called the course of nature, to the carrying on of which
God has appointed us, in various ways, to contribute.
And in the daily course of natural providence, it is
appointed that innocent people should suffer for the
faults of the guilty. Finally, indeed and upon the
whole, every one shall receive according to his personal
deserts; but during the progress, and, for aught we
know, even in order to the completion of this moral
scheme, vicarious punishments may be fit, and absolutely
necessary. We see in what variety of ways one person's
sufferings contribute to the relief of another; and being
familiarized to it, men are not shocked with it. So the
reason of their insisting on objections against the [doctrine
of] satisfaction is, either that they do not consider
God's settled and uniform appointments as His appointments
at all; or else they forget that vicarious punishment is a
providential appointment of every day's experience.<note place='foot'><q>Analogy,</q> Pt.
ii. ch. 5 (abridged).</note></q>
I will but add, that, since all human suffering
is in its last resolution the punishment of sin, and punishment
implies a Judge and a rule of justice, he who
undergoes the punishment of another in his stead may
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
be said in a certain sense to satisfy the claims of justice
towards that other in his own person.
</p>

<p>
One concluding remark has to be made here. In all
sacrifices it was specially required that the thing offered
should be something rare, and unblemished; and in like
manner in all atonements and all satisfactions, not only
was the innocent taken for the guilty, but it was a point
of special importance that the victim should be spotless,
and the more manifest that spotlessness, the more efficacious
was the sacrifice. This leads me to a last principle
which I shall notice as proper to Natural Religion, and
as lightening the prophecies of evil in which it is
founded; I mean the doctrine of meritorious intercession.
The man in the Gospel did but speak for the human
race everywhere, when he said, <q>God heareth not sinners;
but if a man be a worshipper of God, and doth
His will, him He heareth.</q> Hence every religion has
had its eminent devotees, exalted above the body of the
people, mortified men, brought nearer to the Source of
good by austerities, self-inflictions, and prayer, who have
influence with Him, and extend a shelter and gain blessings
for those who become their clients. A belief like
this has been, of course, attended by numberless superstitions;
but those superstitions vary with times and
places, and the belief itself in the mediatorial power of
the good and holy has been one and the same everywhere.
Nor is this belief an idea of past times only or of
heathen countries. It is one of the most natural visions of
the young and innocent. And all of us, the more keenly
we feel our own distance from holy persons, the more are
we drawn near to them, as if forgetting that distance,
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
and proud of them because they are so unlike ourselves,
as being specimens of what our nature may be, and with
some vague hope that we, their relations by blood, may
profit in our own persons by their holiness.
</p>

<p>
Such, then, in outline is that system of natural beliefs
and sentiments, which, though true and divine, is still
possible to us independently of Revelation, and is the
preparation for it; though in Christians themselves it
cannot really be separated from their Christianity, and
never is possessed in its higher forms in any people
without some portion of those inward aids which
Christianity imparts to us, and those endemic traditions
which have their first origin in a paradisiacal illumination.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>§ 2. Revealed Religion.</head>

<p>
In determining, as above, the main features of Natural
Religion, and distinguishing it from the religion of
philosophy or civilization, I may be accused of having
taken a course of my own, for which I have no sufficient
warrant. Such an accusation does not give me much
concern. Every one who thinks on these subjects takes
a course of his own, though it will also happen to be the
course which others take besides himself. The minds
of many separately bear them forward in the same direction,
and they are confirmed in it by each other. This
I consider to be my own case; if I have mis-stated or
omitted notorious facts in my account of Natural Religion,
if I have contradicted or disregarded anything
which He who speaks through my conscience has told
us all directly from Heaven, then indeed I have acted
unjustifiably and have something to unsay; but, if I
have done no more than view the notorious facts of the
case in the medium of my primary mental experiences,
under the aspects which they spontaneously present to
me, and with the aid of my best illative sense, I only
do on one side of the question what those who think
differently do on the other. As they start with
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
one set of first principles, I start with another. I
gave notice just now that I should offer my own witness
in the matter in question; though of course it would not
be worth while my offering it, unless what I felt myself
agreed with what is felt by hundreds and thousands
besides me, as I am sure it does, whatever be the measure,
more or less, of their explicit recognition of it.
</p>

<p>
In thus speaking of Natural Religion as in one sense
a matter of private judgment, and that with a view of
proceeding from it to the proof of Christianity, I seem to
give up the intention of demonstrating either. Certainly
I do; not that I deny that demonstration is possible.
Truth certainly, as such, rests upon grounds intrinsically
and objectively and abstractedly demonstrative, but it
does not follow from this that the arguments producible
in its favour are unanswerable and irresistible. These
latter epithets are relative, and bear upon matters of
fact; arguments in themselves ought to do, what perhaps
in the particular case they cannot do. The fact of
revelation is in itself demonstrably true, but it is not
therefore true irresistibly; else, how comes it to be
resisted? There is a vast distance between what it is
in itself, and what it is to us. Light is a quality of
matter, as truth is of Christianity; but light is not
recognized by the blind, and there are those who do not
recognize truth, from the fault, not of truth, but of
themselves. I cannot convert men, when I ask for
assumptions which they refuse to grant to me; and
without assumptions no one can prove anything about
anything.
</p>

<p>
I am suspicious then of scientific demonstrations in a
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
question of concrete fact, in a discussion between fallible
men. However, let those demonstrate who have the
gift; <q>unusquisque in suo sensu abundet.</q> For me, it
is more congenial to my own judgment to attempt to
prove Christianity in the same informal way in which I
can prove for certain that I have been born into this
world, and that I shall die out of it. It is pleasant to
my own feelings to follow a theological writer, such as
Amort, who has dedicated to the great Pope, Benedict
XIV., what he calls <q>a new, modest, and easy way of
demonstrating the Catholic Religion.</q> In this work
he adopts the argument merely of the <emph>greater</emph>
probability;<note place='foot'><q>Scopus operis est, planiorem Protestantibus
aperire viam ad veram
Ecclesiam. Cùm enim hactenus Polemici nostri insudarint toti in
demonstrandis singulis Religionis Catholicæ articulis, in id ego unum
incumbo, ut hæc tria evincam. Primo: Articulos fundamentales Religionis
Catholicæ esse evidenter credibiliores oppositis, &amp;c. &amp;c....
Demonstratio autem hujus novæ, modestæ, ac facilis viæ, quâ ex articulis
fundamentalibus solùm probabilioribus adstruitur summa Religionis
certitudo, hæc est: Deus, cùm sit sapiens ac providus, tenetur, Religionem
à se revelatam reddere evidenter credibiliorem religionibus falsis.
Imprudenter enim vellet, suam Religionem ab hominibus recipi, nisi
eam redderet evidenter credibiliorem religionibus cæteris. Ergo illa
religio, quæ est evidenter credibilior cæteris, est ipsissima religio a Deo
revelata, adeoque certissimè vera, seu demonstrata. Atqui, &amp;c....
Motivum aggrediendi novam hanc, modestam, ac facilem viam illud
præcipuum est, quòd observem, Protestantium plurimos post innumeros
concertationum fluctus, in iis tandem consedisse syrtibus, ut credant,
nullam dari religionem undequaque demonstratam, &amp;c.... Ratiociniis
denique opponunt ratiocinia; præjudiciis præjudicia ex majoribus
sua,</q> &amp;c.</note>
I prefer to rely on that of an <emph>accumulation</emph> of
various probabilities; but we both hold (that is, I hold
with him), that from probabilities we may construct
legitimate proof, sufficient for certitude. I follow him
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
in holding, that, since a Good Providence watches over
us, He blesses such means of argument as it has pleased
Him to give us, in the nature of man and of the world,
if we use them duly for those ends for which He has
given them; and that, as in mathematics we are justified
by the dictate of nature in withholding our assent from
a conclusion of which we have not yet a strict logical
demonstration, so by a like dictate we are not justified,
in the case of concrete reasoning and especially of
religious inquiry, in waiting till such logical demonstration
is ours, but on the contrary are bound in conscience
to seek truth and to look for certainty by modes
of proof, which, when reduced to the shape of formal
propositions, fail to satisfy the severe requisitions of
science.<note place='foot'><q>Docet naturalis
ratio, Deum, ex ipsâ naturâ bonitatis ac providentiæ
suæ, si velit in mundo habere religionem puram, eamque instituere ac
conservare usque in finem mundi, teneri ad eam religionem reddendam
evidenter credibiliorem ac verisimiliorem cæteris, &amp;c. &amp;c.... Ex hoc
sequitur ulterius; certitudinem moralem de verâ Ecclesiâ elevari posse
ad certitudinem metaphysicam, si homo advertat, certitudinem moralem
absolutè fallibilem substare in materiâ religionis circa ejus constitutiva
fundamentalia speciali providentiæ divinæ, præservatrici ab omni errore....
Itaque homo semel ex serie historicâ actorum perductus ad
moralem certitudinem de auctore, fundatione, propagatione, et continuatione
Ecclesiæ Christianæ, per reflexionem ad existentiam certissimam
providentiæ divinæ in materiâ religionis, à priori lumine naturæ
certitudine metaphysicâ notam, eo ipso eadem infallibili certitudine
intelliget, argumenta de auctore,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;Amort. Ethica Christiana,
p. 252.</note>
</p>

<p>
Here then at once is one momentous doctrine or principle,
which enters into my own reasoning, and which
another ignores, viz. the providence and intention of
God; and of course there are other principles, explicit or
<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>
implicit, which are in like circumstances. It is not
wonderful then, that, while I can prove Christianity
divine to my own satisfaction, I shall not be able to
force it upon any one else. Multitudes indeed I ought
to succeed in persuading of its truth without any force
at all, because they and I start from the same principles,
and what is a proof to me is a proof to them; but if
any one starts from any other principles but ours, I
have not the power to change his principles or the conclusion
which he draws from them, any more than I can
make a crooked man straight. Whether his mind will
ever grow straight, whether I can do anything towards
its becoming straight, whether he is not responsible,
responsible to his Maker, for being mentally crooked, is
another matter; still the fact remains, that, in any
inquiry about things in the concrete, men differ from
each other, not so much in the soundness of their
reasoning as in the principles which govern its exercise,
that those principles are of a personal character, that
where there is no common measure of minds, there is no
common measure of arguments, and that the validity of
proof is determined, not by any scientific test, but by
the illative sense.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, instead of saying that the truths of Revelation
depend on those of Natural Religion, it is more
pertinent to say that belief in revealed truths depends
on belief in natural. Belief is a state of mind; belief
generates belief; states of mind correspond to each other;
the habits of thought and the reasonings which lead
us on to a higher state of belief than our present, are
the very same which we already possess in connexion
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
with the lower state. Those Jews became Christians in
Apostolic times who were already what may be called
crypto-Christians; and those Christians in this day
remain Christian only in name, and (if it so happen) at
length fall away, who are nothing deeper or better than
men of the world, <emph>savants</emph>, literary men, or politicians.
</p>

<p>
That a special preparation of mind is required for each
separate department of inquiry and discussion (excepting,
of course, that of abstract science) is strongly insisted
upon in well-known passages of the Nicomachean
Ethics. Speaking of the variations which are found in
the logical perfection of proof in various subject-matters,
Aristotle says, <q>A well-educated man will expect exactness
in every class of subjects, according as the nature
of the thing admits; for it is much the same mistake to
put up with a mathematician using probabilities, and to
require demonstration of an orator. Each man judges
skilfully in those things about which he is well-informed;
it is of these, that he is a good judge; viz. he, in each
subject-matter, is a judge, who is well-educated in that
subject-matter, and he is in an absolute sense a judge,
who is in all of them well-educated.</q> Again: <q>Young
men come to be mathematicians and the like, but they
cannot possess practical judgment; for this talent is
employed upon individual facts, and these are learned
only by experience; and a youth has not experience, for
experience is only gained by a course of years. And so,
again, it would appear that a boy may be a mathematician,
but not a philosopher, or learned in physics, and
for this reason,&mdash;because the one study deals with
abstractions, while the other studies gain their principles
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
from experience, and in the latter subjects youths do not
give assent, but make assertions, but in the former they
know what it is that they are handling.</q>
</p>

<p>
These words of a heathen philosopher, laying down
broad principles about all knowledge, express a general
rule, which in Scripture is applied authoritatively to the
case of revealed knowledge in particular;&mdash;and that not
once or twice only, but continually, as is notorious. For
instance:&mdash;<q>I have understood,</q> says the Psalmist,
<q>more than all my teachers, because Thy testimonies
are my meditation.</q> And so our Lord: <q>He that hath
ears, let him hear.</q> <q>If any man will do His will, he
shall know of the doctrine.</q> And <q>He that is of God,
heareth the words of God.</q> Thus too the Angels at the
Nativity announce <q>Peace to men of good will.</q> And
we read in the Acts of the Apostles of <q>Lydia, whose
heart the Lord opened to attend to those things which
were said by Paul.</q> And we are told on another occasion,
that <q>as many as were ordained,</q> or disposed by
God, <q>to life everlasting, believed.</q> And St. John
tells us, <q>He that knoweth God, heareth us; he that is
not of God, heareth us not; by this we know the spirit
of truth, and the spirit of error.</q>
</p>

<p>
1.
</p>

<p>
Relying then on these authorities, human and Divine,
I have no scruple in beginning the review I shall take
of Christianity by professing to consult for those only
whose minds are properly prepared for it; and by being
prepared, I mean to denote those who are imbued with
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
the religious opinions and sentiments which I have
identified with Natural Religion. I do not address myself
to those, who in moral evil and physical see nothing
more than imperfections of a parallel nature; who consider
that the difference in gravity between the two is
one of degree only, not of kind; that moral evil is
merely the offspring of physical, and that as we remove
the latter so we inevitably remove the former; that
there is a progress of the human race which tends to
the annihilation of moral evil; that knowledge is virtue,
and vice is ignorance; that sin is a bugbear, not a
reality; that the Creator does not punish except in the
sense of correcting; that vengeance in Him would of
necessity be vindictiveness; that all that we know of
Him, be it much or little, is through the laws of nature;
that miracles are impossible; that prayer to Him is a
superstition; that the fear of Him is unmanly; that
sorrow for sin is slavish and abject; that the only
intelligible worship of Him is to act well our part in
the world, and the only sensible repentance to do better
in future; that if we do our duties in this life, we
may take our chance for the next; and that it is of
no use perplexing our minds about the future state, for
it is all a matter of guess. These opinions characterize
a civilized age; and if I say that I will not argue
about Christianity with men who hold them, I do so,
not as claiming any right to be impatient or peremptory
with any one, but because it is plainly absurd to attempt
to prove a second proposition to those who do not admit
the first.
</p>

<p>
I assume then that the above system of opinion is
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
simply false, inasmuch as it contradicts the primary
teachings of nature in the human race, wherever a
religion is found and its workings can be ascertained.
I assume the Presence of God in our conscience, and the
universal experience, as keen as our experience of bodily
pain, of what we call a sense of sin or guilt. This
sense of sin, as of something not only evil in itself, but
an affront to the good God, is chiefly felt as regards one
or other of three violations of His Law. He Himself
is Sanctity, Truth, and Love; and the three offences
against His Majesty are impurity, inveracity, and cruelty.
All men are not distressed at these offences alike; but
the piercing pain and sharp remorse which one or other
inflicts upon the mind, till habituated to them, brings
home to it the notion of what sin is, and is the vivid
type and representative of its intrinsic hatefulness.
</p>

<p>
Starting from these elements, we may determine without
difficulty the class of sentiments, intellectual and
moral, which constitute the formal preparation for entering
upon what are called the Evidences of Christianity.
These Evidences, then, presuppose a belief and perception
of the Divine Presence, a recognition of His attributes
and an admiration of His Person viewed under them, a
conviction of the worth of the soul and of the reality
and momentousness of the unseen world, an understanding
that, in proportion as we partake in our own persons
of the attributes which we admire in Him, we are dear to
Him, a consciousness on the contrary that we are far from
partaking them, a consequent insight into our guilt and
misery, an eager hope of reconciliation to Him, a desire
to know and to love Him, and a sensitive looking-out
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
in all that happens, whether in the course of nature or
of human life, for tokens, if such there be, of His
bestowing on us what we so greatly need. These are
specimens of the state of mind for which I stipulate in
those who would inquire into the truth of Christianity;
and my warrant for so definite a stipulation lies in the
teaching, as I have described it, of conscience and the
moral sense, in the testimony of those religious rites
which have ever prevailed in all parts of the world, and
in the character and conduct of those who have commonly
been selected by the popular instinct as the special
favourites of Heaven.
</p>

<p>
2.
</p>

<p>
I have appealed to the popular ideas on the subject of
religion, and to the objects of popular admiration and
praise, as illustrating my account of the preparation of
mind which is necessary for the inquirer into Christianity.
Here an obvious objection occurs, in noticing
which I shall be advanced one step farther in the work
which I have undertaken.
</p>

<p>
It may be urged, then, that no appeal will avail me,
which is made to religions so notoriously immoral as
those of paganism; nor indeed can it be made without
an explanation. Certainly, as regards ethical teaching,
various religions, which have been popular in the world,
have not supplied any; and in the corrupt state in which
they appear in history, they are little better than schools
of imposture, cruelty, and impurity. Their objects of
worship were immoral as well as false, and their founders
and heroes have been in keeping with their gods. This
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
is undeniable, but it does not destroy the use that may
be made of their testimony. There is a better side of
their teaching; purity has often been held in reverence,
if not practised; ascetics have been in honour; hospitality
has been a sacred duty; and dishonesty and injustice
have been under a ban. Here then, as before, I take our
natural perception of right and wrong as the standard
for determining the characteristics of Natural Religion,
and I use the religious rites and traditions which are
actually found in the world, only so far as they agree
with our moral sense.
</p>

<p>
This leads me to lay down the general principle, which
I have all along implied:&mdash;that no religion is from God
which contradicts our sense of right and wrong. Doubtless;
but at the same time we ought to be quite sure
that, in a particular case which is before us, we have
satisfactorily ascertained what the dictates of our moral
nature are, and that we apply them rightly, and whether
the applying them or not comes into question at all.
The precepts of a religion certainly may be absolutely
immoral; a religion which simply commanded us to lie,
or to have a community of wives, would
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipso facto</foreign> forfeit
all claim to a divine origin. Jupiter and Neptune, as
represented in the classical mythology, are evil spirits,
and nothing can make them otherwise. And I should
in like manner repudiate a theology which taught that
men were created in order to be wicked and wretched.
</p>

<p>
I alluded just now to those who consider the doctrine
of retributive punishment, or of divine vengeance, to be
incompatible with the true religion; but I do not see
how they can maintain their ground. In order to do
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
so, they have first to prove that an act of vengeance must,
as such, be a sin in our own instance; but even this is far
from clear. Anger and indignation against cruelty and
injustice, resentment of injuries, desire that the false, the
ungrateful, and the depraved should meet with punishment,
these, if not in themselves virtuous feelings, are at
least not vicious; but, first from the certainty that, if
habitual, it will run into excess and become sin, and
next because the office of punishment has not been committed
to us, and further because it is a feeling unsuitable
to those who are themselves so laden with imperfection
and guilt, therefore vengeance, in itself allowable, is forbidden
to us. These exceptions do not hold in the case
of a perfect being, and certainly not in the instance of
the Supreme Judge. Moreover, we see that even men
on earth have different duties, according to their personal
qualifications and their positions in the community. The
rule of morals is the same for all; and yet, notwithstanding,
what is right in one is not necessarily right in
another. What would be a crime in a private man to
do, is a crime in a magistrate not to have done; still
wider is the difference between man and his Maker.
Nor must it be forgotten, that, as I have observed above,
retributive justice is the very attribute under which God
is primarily brought before us in the teachings of our
natural conscience.
</p>

<p>
And further, we cannot determine the character of
particular actions, till we have the whole case before us
out of which they arise; unless, indeed, they are in
themselves distinctively vicious. We all feel the force of
the maxim, <q>Audi alteram partem.</q> It is difficult to
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
trace the path and to determine the scope of Divine
Providence. We read of a day when the Almighty will
condescend to place His actions in their completeness
before His creatures, and <q>will overcome when He is
judged.</q> If, till then, we feel it to be a duty to suspend
our judgment concerning certain of His actions or precepts,
we do no more than what we do every day in the
case of an earthly friend or enemy, whose conduct in
some point requires explanation. It surely is not too
much to expect of us that we should act with parallel
caution, and be <q>memores conditionis nostræ</q> as regards
the acts of our Creator. There is a poem of Parnell's
which strikingly brings home to us how differently the
divine appointments will look in the light of day, from
what they appear to be in our present twilight. An
Angel, in disguise of a man, steals a golden cup,
strangles an infant, and throws a guide into the stream,
and then explains to his horrified companion, that acts
which would be enormities in man, are in him, as God's
minister, deeds of merciful correction or of retribution.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, when we are about to pass judgment on the
dealings of Providence with other men, we shall do well
to consider first His dealings with ourselves. We cannot
know about others, about ourselves we do know
something; and we know that He has ever been good to
us, and not severe. Is it not wise to argue from what
we actually know to what we do not know? It may
turn out in the day of account, that unforgiven souls,
while charging His laws with injustice in the case of
others, may be unable to find fault with His dealings
severally towards themselves.
</p>

<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>

<p>
As to those various religions which, together with
Christianity, teach the doctrine of eternal punishment,
here again we ought, before we judge, to understand, not
only the whole state of the case, but what is meant by
the doctrine itself. Eternity, or endlessness, is in itself
only a negative idea, though punishment is positive. Its
fearful force, as added to punishment, lies in what it is
not; it means no change of state, no annihilation, no
restoration. But it cannot become a quality of punishment,
any more than a man's living seventy years is a
quality of his mind, or enters into the idea of his virtues
or talents. If punishment be attended by continuity, by
a sense of duration and succession, by the mental presence
of its past and its future, by a sustained power of realizing
it,<note place='foot'><q>De hac damnatorum saltem hominum respiratione, nihil adhuc certi
decretum est ab Ecclesiâ Catholicâ: ut propterea non temerè, tanquam
absurda, sit explodenda sanctissimorum Patrum hæc opinio: quamvis à
communi sensu Catholicorum hoc tempore sit aliena.</q>&mdash;Petavius de
Angelis, fin.</note> this must be because it is endless and something
more; such inflictions are an addition to its
endlessness, and do not necessarily belong to it because it
is endless. As I have already said, the great mystery is,
not that evil has no end, but that it had a beginning.
But I submit the whole subject to the Theological School.
</p>

<p>
3.
</p>

<p>
One of the most important effects of Natural Religion
on the mind, in preparation for Revealed, is the anticipation
which it creates, that a Revelation will be given.
That earnest desire of it, which religious minds cherish,
<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>
leads the way to the expectation of it. Those who know
nothing of the wounds of the soul, are not led to deal
with the question, or to consider its circumstances; but
when our attention is roused, then the more steadily we
dwell upon it, the more probable does it seem that a
revelation has been or will be given to us. This presentiment
is founded on our sense, on the one hand, of
the infinite goodness of God, and, on the other, of our
own extreme misery and need&mdash;two doctrines which
are the primary constituents of Natural Religion. It is
difficult to put a limit to the legitimate force of this
antecedent probability. Some minds will feel it so
powerfully, as to recognize in it almost a proof, without
direct evidence, of the divinity of a religion claiming to
be the true, supposing its history and doctrine are free
from positive objection, and there be no rival religion
with plausible claims of its own. Nor ought this trust
in a presumption to seem preposterous to those who are
so confident, on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à
priori</foreign> grounds, that the moon is inhabited
by rational beings, and that the course of nature is
never crossed by miraculous agency. Any how, very
little positive evidence seems to be necessary, when the
mind is penetrated by the strong anticipation which I
am supposing. It was this instinctive apprehension, as
we may conjecture, which carried on Dionysius and
Damaris at Athens to a belief in Christianity, though
St. Paul did no miracle there, and only asserted the
doctrines of the Divine Unity, the Resurrection, and the
universal judgment, while, on the other hand, it had had
no tendency to attach them to any of the mythological
rites in which the place abounded.
</p>

<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>

<p>
Here my method of argument differs from that adopted
by Paley in his Evidences of Christianity. This clear-headed
and almost mathematical reasoner postulates,
for his proof of its miracles, only thus much, that, under
the circumstances of the case, a revelation is not improbable.
He says, <q>We do not assume the attributes of
the Deity, or the existence of a future state.</q> <q>It is
not necessary for our purpose that these propositions
(viz. that a future existence should be destined by God
for His human creation, and that, being so destined, He
should have acquainted them with it,) be capable of
proof, or even that, by arguments drawn from the light
of nature, they can be made out as probable; it is
enough that we are able to say of them, that they are
not so violently improbable, so contradictory to what
we already believe of the divine power and character,
that [they] ought to be rejected at first sight, and to be
rejected by whatever strength or complication of evidence
they be attested.</q> He has such confidence in the
strength of the testimony which he can produce in
favour of the Christian miracles, that he only asks to be
allowed to bring it into court.
</p>

<p>
I confess to much suspicion of legal proceedings and
legal arguments, when used in questions whether of
history or of philosophy. Rules of court are dictated by
what is expedient on the whole and in the long run; but
they incur the risk of being unjust to the claims of particular
cases. Why am I to begin with taking up a
position not my own, and unclothing my mind of that
large outfit of existing thoughts, principles, likings,
desires, and hopes, which make me what I am? If I
<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>
am asked to use Paley's argument for my own conversion,
I say plainly I do not want to be converted by a
smart syllogism;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide supra</hi>, p.
302.</note> if I am asked to convert others by
it, I say plainly I do not care to overcome their reason
without touching their hearts. I wish to deal, not with
controversialists, but with inquirers.
</p>

<p>
I think Paley's argument clear, clever, and powerful;
and there is something which looks like charity in going
out into the highways and hedges, and compelling men
to come in; but in this matter some exertion on the
part of the persons whom I am to convert is a condition
of a true conversion. They who have no religious earnestness
are at the mercy, day by day, of some new argument
or fact, which may overtake them, in favour of one
conclusion or the other. And how, after all, is a man
better for Christianity, who has never felt the need of it
or the desire? On the other hand, if he has longed for
a revelation to enlighten him and to cleanse his heart,
why may he not use, in his inquiries after it, that just
and reasonable anticipation of its probability, which such
longing has opened the way to his entertaining?
</p>

<p>
Men are too well inclined to sit at home, instead of
stirring themselves to inquire whether a revelation has
been given; they expect its evidences to come to them
without their trouble; they act, not as suppliants, but
as judges.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide</hi> the author's
Occasional Sermons, No. 5.</note> Modes of argument such as Paley's, encourage
this state of mind; they allow men to forget
that revelation is a boon, not a debt on the part of the
Giver; they treat it as a mere historical phenomenon.
<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>
If I was told that some great man, a foreigner, whom I
did not know, had come into town, and was on his way
to call on me, and to go over my house, I should send to
ascertain the fact, and meanwhile should do my best
to put my house into a condition to receive him. He
would not be pleased if I left the matter to take its
chance, and went on the maxim that seeing was believing.
Like this is the conduct of those who resolve to treat
the Almighty with dispassionateness, a judicial temper,
clearheadedness, and candour. It is the way with some
men, (surely not a good way,) to say, that without these
lawyerlike qualifications conversion is immoral. It is
their way, a miserable way, to pronounce that there
is no religious love of truth where there is fear of error.
On the contrary, I would maintain that the fear of error
is simply necessary to the genuine love of truth. No
inquiry comes to good which is not conducted under a
deep sense of responsibility, and of the issues depending
upon its determination. Even the ordinary matters of
life are an exercise of conscientiousness; and where
conscience is, fear must be. So much is this acknowledged
just now, that there is almost an affectation, in
popular literature, in the case of criticisms on the fine
arts, on poetry, and music, of speaking about conscientiousness
in writing, painting, or singing; and that
earnestness and simplicity of mind, which makes men
fear to go wrong in these minor matters, has surely a
place in the most serious of all undertakings.
</p>

<p>
It is on these grounds that, in considering Christianity,
I start with conditions different from Paley's; not,
however, as undervaluing the force and the serviceableness
<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>
of his argument, but as preferring inquiry to
disputation in a question about truth.
</p>

<p>
4.
</p>

<p>
There is another point on which my basis of argument
differs from Paley's. He argues on the principle that the
credentials, which ascertain for us a message from above,
are necessarily in their nature miraculous; nor have I
any thought of venturing to say otherwise. In fact, all
professed revelations have been attended, in one shape or
another, with the profession of miracles; and we know
how direct and unequivocal are the miracles of both the
Jewish Covenant and of our own. However, my object
here is to assume as little as possible as regards facts, and
to dwell only on what is patent and notorious; and therefore
I will only insist on those coincidences and their
cumulations, which, though not in themselves miraculous,
do irresistibly force upon us, almost by the law of
our nature, the presence of the extraordinary agency of
Him whose being we already acknowledge. Though
coincidences rise out of a combination of general laws,
there is no law of those coincidences;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide
supra</hi>, p. 84.</note> they have a character
of their own, and seem left by Providence in His
own hands, as the channel by which, inscrutable to us,
He may make known to us His will.
</p>

<p>
For instance, if I am a believer in a God of Truth
and Avenger of dishonesty, and know for certain that a
market-woman, after calling on Him to strike her dead
if she had in her possession a piece of money not hers,
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
did fall down dead on the spot, and that the money was
found in her hand, how can I call this a blind coincidence,
and not discern in it an act of Providence over
and above its general laws? So, certainly, thought the
inhabitants of an English town, when they erected a
pillar as a record of such an event at the place where
it occurred. And if a Pope excommunicates a great
conqueror; and he, on hearing the threat, says to one of
his friends, <q>Does he think the world has gone back a
thousand years? does he suppose the arms will fall from
the hands of my soldiers?</q> and within two years, on the
retreat over the snows of Russia, as two contemporary
historians relate, <q>famine and cold tore their arms from
the grasp of the soldiers,</q> <q>they fell from the hands of
the bravest and most robust,</q> and <q>destitute of the
power of raising them from the ground, the soldiers left
them in the snow;</q> is not this too, though no miracle,
a coincidence so special, as rightly to be called a Divine
judgment? So thinks Alison, who avows with religious
honesty, that <q>there is something in these marvellous
coincidences beyond the operation of chance, and which
even a Protestant historian feels himself bound to mark
for the observation of future years.<note place='foot'>History, vol.
viii.</note></q> And so, too, of a
cumulation of coincidences, separately less striking; when
Spelman sets about establishing the fact of the ill-fortune
which in a multitude of instances has followed upon acts
of sacrilege, then, even though in many instances it has
not followed, and in many instances he exaggerates, still
there may be a large residuum of cases which cannot be
properly resolved into the mere accident of concurrent
<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
causes, but must in reason be considered the warning
voice of God. So, at least, thought Gibson, Bishop of
London, when he wrote, <q>Many of the instances, and
those too well-attested, are so terrible in the event, and
in the circumstances so surprising, that no considering
person can well pass them over.</q>
</p>

<p>
I think, then, that the circumstances under which
a professed revelation comes to us, may be such as to
impress both our reason and our imagination with a
sense of its truth, even though no appeal be made to
strictly miraculous intervention&mdash;in saying which I do
not mean of course to imply that those circumstances,
when traced back to their first origins, are not the
outcome of such intervention, but that the miraculous
intervention addresses us at this day in the guise of
those circumstances; that is, of coincidences, which are
indications, to the illative sense of those who believe in a
Moral Governor, of His immediate Presence, especially
to those who in addition hold with me the strong
antecedent probability that, in His mercy, He will thus
supernaturally present Himself to our apprehension.
</p>

<p>
5.
</p>

<p>
Now as to the fact; has what is so probable in anticipation
actually been granted to us, or have we still to look
out for it? It is very plain, supposing it has been granted,
which among all the religions of the world comes from
God: and if it is not that, a revelation is not yet given,
and we must look forward to the future. There is only one
Religion in the world which tends to fulfil the aspirations,
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>
needs, and foreshadowings of natural faith and devotion.
It may be said, perhaps, that, educated in Christianity,
I merely judge of it by its own principles; but this is not
the fact. For, in the first place, I have taken my idea of
what a revelation must be, in good measure, from the
actual religions of the world; and as to its ethics, the
ideas with which I come to it are derived not simply
from the Gospel, but prior to it from heathen moralists,
whom Fathers of the Church and Ecclesiastical writers
have imitated or sanctioned; and as to the intellectual
position from which I have contemplated the subject,
Aristotle has been my master. Besides, I do not here
single out Christianity with reference simply to its particular
doctrines or precepts, but for a reason which is
on the surface of its history. It alone has a definite
message addressed to all mankind. As far as I know,
the religion of Mahomet has brought into the world no
new doctrine whatever, except, indeed, that of its own
divine origin; and the character of its teaching is too
exact a reflection of the race, time, place, and climate in
which it arose, to admit of its becoming universal. The
same dependence on external circumstances is characteristic,
so far as I know, of the religions of the far
East; nor am I sure of any definite message from God
to man which they convey and protect, though they
may have sacred books. Christianity, on the other
hand, is in its idea an announcement, a preaching; it
is the depositary of truths beyond human discovery,
momentous, practical, maintained one and the same in
substance in every age from its first, and addressed to
all mankind. And it has actually been embraced and is
<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>
found in all parts of the world, in all climates, among
all races, in all ranks of society, under every degree of
civilization, from barbarism to the highest cultivation of
mind. Coming to set right and to govern the world, it
has ever been, as it ought to be, in conflict with large
masses of men, with the civil power, with physical force,
with adverse philosophies; it has had successes, it has
had reverses; but it has had a grand history, and has
effected great things, and is as vigorous in its age as in
its youth. In all these respects it has a distinction in
the world and a pre-eminence of its own; it has upon it
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ facie</foreign>
signs of divinity; I do not know what can
be advanced by rival religions to match prerogatives so
special; so that I feel myself justified in saying either
Christianity is from God, or a revelation has not yet
been given to us.
</p>

<p>
It will not surely be objected, as a point in favour of
some of the Oriental religions, that they are older than
Christianity by some centuries; yet, should it be so
said, it must be recollected that Christianity is only the
continuation and conclusion of what professes to be an
earlier revelation, which may be traced back into prehistoric
times, till it is lost in the darkness that hangs
over them. As far as we know, there never was a time
when that revelation was not,&mdash;a revelation continuous
and systematic, with distinct representatives and an
orderly succession. And this, I suppose, is far more
than can be said for the religions of the East.
</p>

<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>

<p>
6.
</p>

<p>
Here, then, I am brought to the consideration of the
Hebrew nation and the Mosaic religion, as the first step
in the direct evidence for Christianity.
</p>

<p>
The Jews are one of the few Oriental nations who are
known in history as a people of progress, and their
line of progress is the development of religious truth.
In that their own line they stand by themselves among
all the populations, not only of the East, but of the
West. Their country may be called the classical home
of the religious principle, as Greece is the home of
intellectual power, and Rome that of political and practical
wisdom. Theism is their life; it is emphatically
their national religion, for they never were without it,
and were made a people by means of it. This is a
phenomenon singular and solitary in history, and must
have a meaning. If there be a God and Providence,
it must come from Him, whether immediately or indirectly;
and the people themselves have ever maintained
that it has been His direct work, and has been recognized
by Him as such. We are apt to treat pretences
to a divine mission or to supernatural powers as of
frequent occurrence, and on that score to dismiss them
from our thoughts; but we cannot so deal with Judaism.
When mankind had universally denied the first lesson
of their conscience by lapsing into polytheism, is it
a thing of slight moment that there was just one exception
to the rule, that there was just one people who, first
by their rulers and priests, and afterwards by their own
unanimous zeal, professed, as their distinguishing doctrine,
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
the Divine Unity and Government of the world,
and that, moreover, not only as a natural truth, but as
revealed to them by that God Himself of whom they
spoke,&mdash;who so embodied it in their national polity, that
a Theocracy was the only name by which it could be
called? It was a people founded and set up in Theism,
kept together by Theism, and maintaining Theism for a
period from first to last of 2000 years, till the dissolution
of their body politic; and they have maintained it since
in their state of exile and wandering for 2000 years
more. They begin with the beginning of history, and
the preaching of this august dogma begins with them.
They are its witnesses and confessors, even to torture
and death; on it and its revelation are moulded their
laws and government; on this their politics, philosophy,
and literature are founded; of this truth their poetry is
the voice, pouring itself out in devotional compositions
which Christianity, through all its many countries and
ages, has been unable to rival; on this aboriginal truth,
as time goes on, prophet after prophet bases his further
revelations, with a sustained reference to a time when,
according to the secret counsels of its Divine Object and
Author, it is to receive completion and perfection,&mdash;till
at length that time comes.
</p>

<p>
The last age of their history is as strange as their first.
When that time of destined blessing came, which they had
so accurately marked out, and were so carefully waiting for&mdash;a
time which found them, in fact, more zealous for their
Law, and for the dogma it enshrined, than they ever had
been before&mdash;then, instead of any final favour coming on
them from above, they fell under the power of their
<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>
enemies, and were overthrown, their holy city razed to
the ground, their polity destroyed, and the remnant of
their people cast off to wander far and away through
every land except their own, as we find them at this day;
lasting on, century after century, not absorbed in other
populations, not annihilated, as likely to last on, as
unlikely to be restored, as far as outward appearances go,
now as a thousand years ago. What nation has so grand,
so romantic, so terrible a history? Does it not fulfil the
idea of, what the nation calls itself, a chosen people,
chosen for good and evil? Is it not an exhibition in a
course of history of that primary declaration of conscience,
as I have been determining it, <q>With the upright Thou
shalt be upright, and with the froward Thou shalt be
froward</q>? It must have a meaning, if there is a God.
We know what was their witness of old time; what is
their witness now?
</p>

<p>
Why, I say, was it that, after so memorable a career,
when their sins and sufferings were now to come to an
end, when they were looking out for a deliverance and a
Deliverer, suddenly all was reversed for once and for all?
They were the favoured servants of God, and yet a peculiar
reproach and note of infamy is affixed to their name.
It was their belief that His protection was unchangeable,
and that their Law would last for ever;&mdash;it was their
consolation to be taught by an uninterrupted tradition,
that it could not die, except by changing into a new self,
more wonderful than it was before;&mdash;it was their faithful
expectation that a promised King was coming, the
Messiah, who would extend the sway of Israel over all
people;&mdash;it was a condition of their covenant, that, as
<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>
a reward to Abraham, their first father, the day at length
should dawn when the gates of their narrow land should
open, and they should pour out for the conquest and
occupation of the whole earth;&mdash;and, I repeat, when the
day came, they did go forth, and they did spread into
all lands, but as hopeless exiles, as eternal wanderers.
</p>

<p>
Are we to say that this failure is a proof that, after all,
there was nothing providential in their history? For
myself, I do not see how a second portent obliterates a
first; and, in truth, their own testimony and their own
sacred books carry us on towards a better solution of the
difficulty. I have said they were in God's favour under
a covenant,&mdash;perhaps they did not fulfil the conditions of
it. This indeed seems to be their own account of the
matter, though it is not clear what their breach of engagement
was. And that in some way they did sin,
whatever their sin was, is corroborated by the well-known
chapter in the Book of Deuteronomy, which so strikingly
anticipates the nature of their punishment. That passage,
translated into Greek as many as 350 years before the
siege of Jerusalem by Titus, has on it the marks of a
wonderful prophecy; but I am not now referring to it
as such, but merely as an indication that the disappointment,
which actually overtook them at the Christian
era, was not necessarily out of keeping with the original
divine purpose, or again with the old promise made to
them, and their confident expectation of its fulfilment.
Their national ruin, which came instead of aggrandizement,
is described in that book, in spite of all promises,
with an emphasis and minuteness which prove that it
was contemplated long before, at least as a possible issue
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>
of the fortunes of Israel. Among other inflictions which
should befall the guilty people, it was told them that
they should fall down before their enemies, and should
be scattered throughout all the kingdoms of the earth;
that they never should have quiet in those nations, or
have rest for the sole of their foot; that they were to
have a fearful heart and languishing eyes, and a soul
consumed with heaviness; that they were to suffer wrong,
and to be crushed at all times, and to be astonished at
the terror of their lot; that their sons and daughters
were to be given to another people, and they were to look
and to sicken all the day, and their life was ever to hang
in doubt before them, and fear to haunt them day and
night; that they should be a proverb and a by-word of all
people among whom they were brought; and that curses
were to come on them, and to be signs and wonders on
them and their seed for ever. Such are some portions,
and not the most terrible, of this extended anathema;
and its partial accomplishment at an earlier date of their
history was a warning to them, when the destined time
drew near, that, however great the promises made to
them might be, those promises were dependent on the
terms of the covenant which stood between them and
their Maker, and that, as they had turned to curses at
that former time, so they might turn to curses again.
</p>

<p>
This grand drama, so impressed with the characters
of supernatural agency, concerns us here only in its
bearing upon the evidence for the divine origin of
Christianity; and it is at this point that Christianity
comes upon the historical scene. It is a notorious fact
that it issued from the Jewish land and people; and, had
<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
it no other than this historical connexion with Judaism,
it would have some share in the prestige of its original
home. But it claims to be far more than this; it
professes to be the actual completion of the Mosaic Law,
the promised means of deliverance and triumph to the
nation, which that nation itself, as I have said, has since
considered to be, on account of some sin or other, withheld
or forfeited. It professes to be, not the casual, but the
legitimate offspring, heir, and successor of the Mosaic
covenant, or rather to be Judaism itself, developed and
transformed. Of course it has to prove its claim, as well
as to prefer it; but if it succeeds in doing so, then all
those tokens of the Divine Presence, which distinguish
the Jewish history, at once belong to it, and are a portion
of its credentials.
</p>

<p>
And at least the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>primâ
facie</foreign> view of its relations
towards Judaism is in favour of these pretensions. It
is an historical fact, that, at the very time that the Jews
committed their unpardonable sin, whatever it was, and
were driven out from their home to wander over the
earth, their Christian brethren, born of the same stock,
and equally citizens of Jerusalem, did also issue forth
from the same home, but in order to subdue that same
earth and make it their own; that is, they undertook the
very work which, according to the promise, their nation
actually was ordained to execute; and, with a method of
their own indeed, and with a new end, and only slowly
and painfully, but still really and thoroughly, they did
it. And since that time the two children of the promise
have ever been found together&mdash;of the promise forfeited
and the promise fulfilled; and whereas the Christian has
<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>
been in high place, so the Jew has been degraded and
despised&mdash;the one has been <q>the head,</q> and the other
<q>the tail;</q> so that, to go no farther, the fact that
Christianity actually has done what Judaism was to
have done, decides the controversy, by the logic of facts,
in favour of Christianity. The prophecies announced
that the Messiah was to come at a definite time and
place; Christians point to Him as coming then and
there, as announced; they are not met by any counter
claim or rival claimant on the part of the Jews, only by
their assertion that He did not come at all, though up
to the event they had said He was then and there coming.
Further, Christianity clears up the mystery which hangs
over Judaism, accounting fully for the punishment of
the people, by specifying their sin, their heinous sin. If,
instead of hailing their own Messiah, they crucified Him,
then the strange scourge which has pursued them after
the deed, and the energetic wording of the curse before
it, are explained by the very strangeness of their guilt;&mdash;or
rather, their sin is their punishment; for in rejecting
their Divine King, they <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipso
facto</foreign> lost the living principle
and tie of their nationality. Moreover, we see what
led them into error; they thought a triumph and an
empire were to be given to them at once, which were
given indeed eventually, but by the slow and gradual
growth of many centuries and a long warfare.
</p>

<p>
On the whole, then, I observe, on the one hand, that,
Judaism having been the channel of religious traditions
which are lost in the depth of their antiquity, of course
it is a great point for Christianity to succeed in proving
that it is the legitimate heir to that former religion.
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
Nor is it, on the other, of less importance to the significance
of those early traditions to be able to determine
that they were not lost together with their original store-house,
but were transferred, on the failure of Judaism, to
the custody of the Christian Church. And this apparent
correspondence between the two is in itself a presumption
for such correspondence being real. Next, I observe, that
if the history of Judaism is so wonderful as to suggest
the presence of some special divine agency in its appointments
and fortunes, still more wonderful and divine is
the history of Christianity; and again it is more wonderful
still, that two such wonderful creations should
span almost the whole course of ages, during which
nations and states have been in existence, and should
constitute a professed system of continued intercourse
between earth and heaven from first to last amid all the
vicissitudes of human affairs. This phenomenon again
carries on its face, to those who believe in a God, the
probability that it has that divine origin which it professes
to have; and, (when viewed in the light of the
strong presumption which I have insisted on, that in
God's mercy a revelation from Him will be granted to
us, and of the contrast presented by other religions, no
one of which professes to be a revelation direct, definite,
and integral as this is,)&mdash;this phenomenon, I say, of
cumulative marvels raises that probability, both for
Judaism and Christianity, in religious minds, almost to
a certainty.
</p>

<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>

<p>
7.
</p>

<p>
If Christianity is connected with Judaism as closely as
I have been supposing, then there have been, by means
of the two, direct communications between man and his
Maker from time immemorial down to this day&mdash;a great
prerogative such, that it is nowhere else even claimed.
No other religion but these two professes to be the organ
of a formal revelation, certainly not of a revelation which
is directed to the benefit of the whole human race. Here
it is that Mahometanism fails, though it claims to carry
on the line of revelation after Christianity; for it is the
mere creed and rite of certain races, bringing with it, as
such, no gifts to our nature, and is rather a reformation
of local corruptions, and a return to the ceremonial worship
of earlier times, than a new and larger revelation.
And while Christianity was the heir to a dead religion,
Mahometanism was little more than a rebellion against
a living one. Moreover, though Mahomet professed to
be the Paraclete, no one pretends that he occupies a place
in the Christian Scriptures as prominent as that which
the Messiah fills in the Jewish. To this especial prominence
of the Messianic idea I shall now advert; that is,
to the prophecies of the Old Scriptures, and to the argument
which they furnish in favour of Christianity; and
though I know that argument might be clearer and more
exact than it is, and I do not pretend here to do much
more than refer to the fact of its existence, still so far
forth as we enter into it, will it strengthen our conviction
of the claim to divinity both of the Religion which
<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>
is the organ of those prophecies, and of the Religion
which is their object.
</p>

<p>
Now that the Jewish Scriptures were in existence long
before the Christian era, and were in the sole custody of
the Jews, is undeniable; whatever then their Scriptures
distinctly say of Christianity, if not attributable to chance
or to happy conjecture, is prophetic. It is undeniable
too, that the Jews gathered from those books that a
great Personage was to be born of their stock, and to
conquer the whole world and to become the instrument
of extraordinary blessings to it; moreover, that he would
make his appearance at a fixed date, and that, the very
date when, as it turned out, our Lord did actually come.
This is the great outline of the prediction, and if nothing
more could be said about them than this, to prove as
much as this is far from unimportant. And it is undeniable,
I say, both that the Jewish Scriptures contain
thus much, and that the Jews actually understood them
as containing it.
</p>

<p>
First, then, as to what Scripture declares. From the
book of Genesis we learn that the chosen people was set
up in this one idea, viz. to be a blessing to the whole
earth, and that, by means of one of their own race, a
greater than their father Abraham. This was the meaning
and drift of their being chosen. There is no room
for mistake here; the divine purpose is stated from the
first with the utmost precision. At the very time of
Abraham's call, he is told of it:&mdash;<q>I will make of thee
a great nation, and in thee shall all tribes of the earth be
blessed.</q> Thrice is this promise and purpose announced
in Abraham's history; and after Abraham's time it is
<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>
repeated to Isaac, <q>In thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed;</q> and after Isaac to Jacob, when a
wanderer from his home, <q>In thee and in thy seed shall
all the tribes of the earth be blessed.</q> And from Jacob
the promise passes on to his son Judah, and that with
an addition, viz. with a reference to the great Person
who was to be the world-wide blessing, and to the date
when He should come. Judah was the chosen son of
Jacob, and his staff or sceptre, that is, his patriarchal
authority, was to endure till a greater than Judah came,
so that the loss of the sceptre, when it took place, was
the sign of His near approach. <q>The sceptre,</q> says
Jacob on his death-bed, <q>shall not be taken away from
Judah, until He come for whom it is reserved,</q> or <q>who
is to be sent,</q> <q>and He shall be the expectation of the
nations.<note place='foot'><p>Before and apart from Christianity, the Samaritan Version
reads, <q>donec veniat Pacificus, et ad ipsum congregabuntur populi.</q> The Targum,
<q>donec veniat Messias, cujus est regnum, et obedient populi.</q> The
Septuagint, <q>donec veniant quæ reservata sunt illi</q> (or <q>donec veniat
cui reservatum est</q>), <q>et ipse expectatio gentium.</q> And so again the
Vulgate, <q>donec veniat qui mittendus est, et ipse erit expectatio gentium.</q>
</p>
<p>
The ingenious translation of some learned men (<q>donec venerit Juda
Siluntem,</q> i. e. <q>the tribe-sceptre shall not depart from Judah till
Judah comes to Shiloh</q>), with the explanation that the tribe of Judah
had the leadership in the war against the Canaanites, <hi rend='italic'>vide</hi> Judges
i. 1, 2; xx. 18 (i. e. after Joshua's <emph>death</emph>), and that possibly, and for
what we know, the tribe gave up that war-command at Shiloh, <hi rend='italic'>vide</hi>
Joshua xviii. 1 (i. e. in Joshua's <emph>life-time</emph>), labours under three grave
difficulties: 1. That the patriarchal sceptre is a temporary war-command. 2. That
this command belonged to Judah at the very time that it belonged to
Joshua. And 3. That it was finally lost to Judah (Joshua living) before
it had been committed to Judah (Joshua dead).</p></note></q>
</p>

<p>
Such was the categorical prophecy, literal and unequivocal
in its wording, direct and simple in its scope.
<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>
One man, born of the chosen tribe, was the destined
minister of blessing to the whole world; and the race,
as represented by that tribe, was to lose its old self in
gaining a new self in Him. Its destiny was sealed
upon it in its beginning. An expectation was the
measure of its life. It was created for a great end, and
in that end it had its ending. Such were the initial
communications made to the chosen people, and there
they stopped;&mdash;as if the outline of promise, so sharply
cut, had to be effectually imprinted on their minds,
before more knowledge was given to them; as if, by the
long interval of years which passed before the more
varied prophecies in type and figure, after the manner of
the East, were added, the original notices might stand
out in the sight of all in their severe explicitness, as
archetypal truths, and guides in interpreting whatever
else was obscure in its wording or complex in its
direction.
</p>

<p>
And in the second place it is quite clear that the
Jews did thus understand their prophecies, and did
expect their great Ruler, in the very age in which our
Lord came, and in which they, on the other hand, were
destroyed, losing their old self without gaining their
new. Heathen historians shall speak for the fact.
<q>A persuasion had possession of most of them,</q> says
Tacitus, speaking of their resistance to the Romans,
<q>that it was contained in the ancient books of the
priests that at that very time the East should prevail,
and that men who issued from Judea should obtain the
empire. The common people, as is the way with
human cupidity, having once interpreted in their own
<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>
favour this grand destiny, were not even by their
reverses brought round to the truth of facts.</q> And
Suetonius extends the belief:&mdash;<q>The whole East was
rife with an old and persistent belief, that at that time
persons who issued from Judea, should possess the
empire.</q> After the event of course the Jews drew
back, and denied the correctness of their expectation,
still they could not deny that the expectation had
existed. Thus the Jew Josephus, who was of the
Roman party, says that what encouraged them in the
stand they made against the Romans was <q>an ambiguous
oracle, found in their sacred writings, that at that date
some one of them from that country should rule the
world.</q> He can but pronounce that the oracle was
ambiguous; he cannot state that they thought it so.
</p>

<p>
Now, considering that at that very time our Lord did
appear as a teacher, and founded not merely a religion,
but (what was then quite a new idea in the world) a
system of religious warfare, an aggressive and militant
body, a dominant Catholic Church, which aimed at the
benefit of all nations by the spiritual conquest of all;
and that this warfare, then begun by it, has gone on
without cessation down to this day, and now is as living
and real as ever it was; that that militant body has
from the first filled the world, that it has had wonderful
successes, that its successes have on the whole been of
extreme benefit to the human race, that it has imparted
an intelligent notion about the Supreme God to millions
who would have lived and died in irreligion, that it has
raised the tone of morality wherever it has come, has
abolished great social anomalies and miseries, has elevated
<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>
the female sex to its proper dignity, has protected the
poorer classes, has destroyed slavery, encouraged literature
and philosophy, and had a principal part in that
civilization of human kind, which, with some evils still,
has on the whole been productive of far greater good,&mdash;considering,
I say, that all this began at the destined,
expected, recognized season when the old prophecy said
that in one Man, born of the tribe of Judah, all the
tribes of the earth were to be blessed, I feel I have a
right to say (and my line of argument does not lead me
to say more), that it is at the very least a remarkable
coincidence,&mdash;that is, one of those coincidences which,
when they are accumulated, come close upon the idea of
miracle, as being impossible without the Hand of God
directly and immediately in them.
</p>

<p>
When we have got as far as this, we may go on a
great deal farther. Announcements, which could not
be put forward in the front of the argument, as being
figurative, vague, or ambiguous, may be used validly and
with great effect, when they have been interpreted for
us, first by the prophetic outline, and still more by the
historical object. It is a principle which applies to all
matters on which we reason, that what is only a maze
of facts, without order or drift prior to the explanation,
may, when we once have that explanation, be located
and adjusted with great facility in all its separate parts,
as we know is the case as regards the motions of the
heavenly bodies since the hypothesis of Newton. In
like manner the event is the true key to prophecy, and
reconciles conflicting and divergent descriptions by embodying
them in one common representative. Thus it
<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>
is that we learn how, as the prophecies said, the Messiah
could both suffer, yet be victorious; His kingdom be
Judaic in structure, yet evangelic in spirit; and His
people the children of Abraham, yet <q>sinners of the
Gentiles.</q> These seeming paradoxes, are only parallel
and akin to those others which form so prominent a
feature in the teaching of our Lord and His Apostles.
</p>

<p>
As to the Jews, since they lived before the event, it is
not wonderful, that, though they were right in their
general interpretation of Scripture as far as it went,
they stopped short of the whole truth; nay, that even
when their Messiah came, they could not recognize Him
as the promised King as we recognize Him now;&mdash;for
we have the experience of His history for nearly two
thousand years, by which to interpret their Scriptures.
We may partly understand their position towards those
prophecies, by our own at present towards the Apocalypse.
Who can deny the superhuman grandeur and impressiveness
of that sacred book! yet, as a prophecy, though
some outlines of the future are discernible, how differently
it affects us from the predictions of Isaiah! either
because it relates to undreamed-of events still to come,
or because it has been fulfilled long ago in events which
in their detail and circumstance have never become
history. And the same remark applies doubtless to
portions of the Messianic prophecies still; but, if their
fulfilment has been thus gradual in time past, we must
not be surprised though portions of them still await
their slow but true accomplishment in the future.
</p>

<pb n='447'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>

<p>
8.
</p>

<p>
When I implied that in some points of view Christianity
has not answered the expectations of the old
prophecies, of which it claims to be the fulfilment, I had
in mind principally the contrast which is presented to
us between the picture which they draw of the universality
of the kingdom of the Messiah, and that partial
development of it through the world, which is all the
Christian Church can show; and again the contrast
between the rest and peace which they said He was to
introduce, and the Church's actual history,&mdash;the conflicts
of opinion which have raged within its pale, the violent
acts and unworthy lives of many of its rulers, and the
moral degradation of great masses of its people. I do
not profess to meet these difficulties here, except by
saying that the failure of Christianity in one respect in
corresponding to those prophecies cannot destroy the
force of its correspondence to them in others; just as we
may allow that the portrait of a friend is a faulty
likeness to him, and yet be quite sure that it is his
portrait. What I shall actually attempt to show here
is this,&mdash;that Christianity was quite aware from the
first of its own prospective future, so unlike the
expectations which the prophets would excite concerning
it, and that it meets the difficulty thence arising by
anticipation, by giving us its own predictions of what it
was to be in historical fact, predictions which are at once
explanatory comments upon the Jewish Scriptures, and
direct evidences of its own prescience.
</p>

<p>
I think it observable then, that, though our Lord
<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/>
claims to be the Messiah, He shows so little of conscious
dependence on the old Scriptures, or of anxiety to
fulfil them; as if it became Him, who was the Lord of
the Prophets, to take His own course, and to leave their
utterances to adjust themselves to Him as they could,
and not to be careful to accommodate Himself to them.
The evangelists do indeed show some such natural zeal
in His behalf, and thereby illustrate what I notice in
Him by the contrast. They betray an earnestness to
trace in His Person and history the accomplishment of
prophecy, as when they discern it in His return from
Egypt, in His life at Nazareth, in the gentleness and
tenderness of His mode of teaching, and in the various
minute occurrences of His passion; but He Himself
goes straight forward on His way, of course claiming to
be the Messiah of the Prophets,<note place='foot'>He appeals
to the prophecies in evidence of His Divine mission, in
addressing the Nazarites (Luke iv. 18), St. John's disciples (Matt. xi. 5),
and the Pharisees (Matt. xxi. 42, and John v. 39), but not in details.
The appeal to details He reserves for His disciples. <hi rend='italic'>Vide</hi> Matt.
xi. 10; xxvi. 24, 31, 54: Luke xxii. 37; xxiv. 27, 46.</note> still not so much
recurring to past prophecies, as uttering new ones, with
an antithesis not unlike that which is so impressive in
the Sermon on the Mount, when He first says, <q>It has
been said by them of old time,</q> and then adds, <q>But I
say unto you.</q> Another striking instance of this is seen
in the Names under which He spoke of Himself, which
have little or no foundation in any thing which was said
of Him beforehand in the Jewish Scriptures. They
speak of Him as Ruler, Prophet, King, Hope of Israel,
Offspring of Judah, and Messiah; and His Evangelists
and Disciples call Him Master, Lord, Prophet, Son of
<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>
David, King of Israel, King of the Jews, and Messiah
or Christ; but He Himself, though, I repeat, He
acknowledges these titles as His own, especially that of
the Christ, chooses as His special designations these two,
Son of God and Son of Man, the latter of which is only
once given Him in the Old Scriptures, and by which
He corrects any narrow Judaic interpretation of them;
while the former was never distinctly used of Him
before He came, and seems first to have been announced
to the world by the Angel Gabriel and St. John the
Baptist. In those two Names, Son of God and Son of
Man, declaratory of the two natures of Emmanuel, He
separates Himself from the Jewish Dispensation, in
which He was born, and inaugurates the New Covenant.
</p>

<p>
This is not an accident, and I shall now give some
instances of it, that is, of what I may call the independent
autocratic view which He takes of His own religion,
into which the old Judaism was melting, and of
the prophetic insight into its spirit and its future which
that view involves. In quoting His own sayings
from the Evangelists for this purpose, I assume (of
which there is no reasonable doubt) that they wrote
before any historical events had happened of a nature to
cause them unconsciously to modify or to colour the
language which their Master used.
</p>

<p>
1. First, then, the fact has been often insisted on as a
bold conception, unheard of before, and worthy of divine
origin, that He should even project a universal religion,
and that to be effected by what may be called a propagandist
movement from one centre. Hitherto it had
been the received notion in the world, that each nation
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>
had its own gods. The Romans legislated upon that
basis, and the Jews had held it from the first, holding
of course also, that all gods but their own God were idols
and demons. It is true that the Jews ought to have been
taught by their prophecies what was in store for the world
and for them, and that their first dispersion through the
Empire centuries before Christ came, and the proselytes
which they collected around them in every place, were a
kind of comment on the prophecies larger than their own;
but we see what was, in fact, when our Lord came, their
expectation from those prophecies, in the passages which
I have quoted above from the Roman historians of His
day. But He from the first resisted those plausible, but
mistaken interpretations of Scripture. In His cradle indeed
He had been recognized by the Eastern sages as their
king; the Angel announced that He was to reign over
the house of Jacob; Nathanael, too, owned Him as
the Messiah with a regal title; but He, on entering
upon His work, interpreted these anticipations in His
own way, and that not the way of Theudas and Judas of
Galilee, who took the sword, and collected soldiers about
them,&mdash;nor the way of the Tempter, who offered Him
<q>all the kingdoms of the world.</q> In the words of the
Evangelists, He began, not to fight, but <q>to preach;</q>
and further, to <q>preach the kingdom of heaven,</q> saying,
<q>The time is accomplished, and the kingdom of God is
at hand; repent, and believe the Gospel.</q> This is the
significant title, <q>the kingdom of heaven,</q>&mdash;the more
significant, when explained by the attendant precept of
repentance and faith,&mdash;on which He founds the polity
which He was establishing from first to last. One of
<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
His last sayings before He suffered was, <q>My kingdom
is not of this world.</q> And His last words, before He
left the earth, when His disciples asked Him about His
kingdom, were that they, preachers as they were, and
not soldiers, should <q>be His witnesses to the end of
the earth,</q> should <q>preach to all nations, beginning
with Jerusalem,</q> should <q>go into the world and preach
the Gospel to every creature,</q> should <q>go and make disciples
of all nations till the consummation of all things.</q>
</p>

<p>
The last Evangelist of the four is equally precise in
recording the initial purpose with which our Lord began
His ministry, viz. to create an empire, not by force, but
by persuasion. <q>Light is come into the world; every
one that doth evil, hateth the light, but he that doth
truth, cometh to the light.</q> <q>Lift up your eyes, and
see the countries, for they are white already to harvest.</q>
<q>No man can come to Me, except the Father, who
hath sent Me, draw him.</q> <q>And I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all things to Myself.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus, while the Jews, relying on their Scriptures
with great appearance of reason, looked for a deliverer
who should conquer with the sword, we find that Christianity,
from the first, not by an after-thought upon
trial and experience, but as a fundamental truth, magisterially
set right that mistake, transfiguring the old
prophecies, and bringing to light, as St. Paul might
say, <q>the mystery which had been hidden from ages
and generations, but now was made manifest in His
saints, the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles,
which is Christ in you,</q> not simply over you, but in
you, by faith and love, <q>the hope of glory.</q>
</p>

<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>

<p>
2. I have partly anticipated my next remark, which
relates to the means by which the Christian enterprise
was to be carried into effect. That preaching was to
have a share in the victories of the Messiah was plain
from Prophet and Psalmist; but then Charlemagne
preached, and Mahomet preached, with an army to
back them. The same Psalm which speaks of those
<q>who preach good tidings,</q> speaks also of their King's
<q>foot being dipped in the blood of His enemies;</q> but
what is so grandly original in Christianity is, that on
its broad field of conflict its preachers were to be simply
unarmed, and to suffer, but to prevail. If we were not
so familiar with our Lord's words, I think they would
astonish us. <q>Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst
of wolves.</q> This was to be their normal state, and so
it was; and all the promises and directions given to
them imply it. <q>Blessed are they that suffer persecution;</q>
<q>blessed are ye when they revile you;</q> <q>the
meek shall inherit the earth;</q> <q>resist not evil;</q> <q>you
shall be hated of all men for My Name's sake;</q> <q>a
man's enemies shall be they of his own household;</q>
<q>he that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved.</q>
What sort of encouragement was this for men who were
to go about an immense work? Do men in this way
send out their soldiers to battle, or their sons to India
or Australia? The King of Israel hated Micaiah,
because he always <q>prophesied of him evil.</q> <q>So
persecuted they the Prophets that were before you,</q>
says our Lord. Yes, and the Prophets failed; they
were persecuted and they lost the battle. <q>Take, my
brethren,</q> says St. James, <q>for an example of suffering
<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
evil, of labour and patience, the Prophets, who spake in
the Name of the Lord.</q> They were <q>racked, mocked,
stoned, cut asunder, they wandered about,&mdash;of whom
the world was not worthy,</q> says St. Paul. What an
argument to encourage them to aim at success by
suffering, to put before them the precedent of those
who suffered and who failed!
</p>

<p>
Yet the first preachers, our Lord's immediate disciples,
saw no difficulty in a prospect to human eyes
so appalling, so hopeless. How connatural this strange,
unreasoning, reckless courage was with their regenerate
state is shown most signally in St. Paul, as having been
a convert of later vocation. He was no personal associate
of our Lord's, yet how faithfully he echoes back
our Lord's language! His instrument of conversion
is <q>the foolishness of preaching;</q> <q>the weak things
of the earth confound the strong;</q> <q>we hunger and
thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no
home;</q> <q>we are reviled and bless, we are persecuted,
and blasphemed, and are made the refuse of this world,
and the offscouring of all things.</q> Such is the intimate
comprehension, on the part of one who had never seen
our Lord on earth, and knew little from His original
disciples of the genius of His teaching;&mdash;and considering
that the prophecies, upon which he had lived from
his birth, for the most part bear on their surface a
contrary doctrine, and that the Jews of that day did
commonly understand them in that contrary sense, we
cannot deny that Christianity, in tracing out the method
by which it was to prevail in the future, took its own,
independent line, and, in assigning from the first a rule
<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>
and a history to its propagation, a rule and a history
which have been carried out to this day, rescues itself
from the charge of but partially fulfilling those Jewish
prophecies, by the assumption of a prophetical character
of its own.
</p>

<p>
3. Now we come to a third point, in which the
Divine Master explains, and in a certain sense corrects,
the prophecies of the Old Covenant, by a more exact
interpretation of them from Himself. I have granted
that they seemed to say that His coming would issue
in a period of peace and religiousness. <q>Behold,</q> says
the Prophet, <q>a king shall reign in justice, and princes
shall rule in judgment. The fool shall no more be
called prince, neither shall the deceitful be called great.
The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
lie down with the kid. They shall not hurt nor kill
in all My holy mountain, for the earth is filled with
the knowledge of the Lord, as the covering waters of
the sea.</q>
</p>

<p>
These words seem to predict a reversal of the consequences
of the fall, and that reversal has not been
granted to us, it is true; but let us consider how distinctly
Christianity warns us against any such anticipation.
While it is so forcibly laid down in the Gospels
that the history of the kingdom of heaven begins in
suffering and sanctity, it is as plainly said that it results
in unfaithfulness and sin; that is to say, that, though
there are at all times many holy, many religious men in it,
and though sanctity, as at the beginning, is ever the life
and the substance and the germinal seed of the Divine
Kingdom, yet there will be many too, there will be
<pb n='455'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>
more, who by their lives are a scandal and injury to
it, not a defence. This again, is an astonishing announcement,
and the more so when viewed in contrast
with the precepts delivered by our Lord in His Sermon
on the Mount, and His description to the Apostles of
their weapons and their warfare. So perplexing to
Christians was the fact when fulfilled, as it was in
no long time on a large scale, that three of the early
heresies more or less originated in obstinate, unchristian
refusal to readmit to the privileges of the Gospel those
who had fallen into sin. Yet our Lord's words are
express: He tells us that <q>Many are called, few are
chosen;</q> in the parable of the Marriage Feast, the
servants who are sent out gather together <q>all that they
found, both bad and good;</q> the foolish virgins <q>had
no oil in their vessels;</q> amid the good seed an enemy
sows seed that is noxious or worthless; and <q>the kingdom
is like to a net which gathered together all kind
of fishes;</q> and <q>at the end of the world the Angels
shall go forth, and shall separate the wicked from among
the just.</q>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, He not only speaks of His religion as destined
to possess a wide temporal power, such, that, as
in the case of the Babylonian, <q>the birds of the air should
dwell in its branches,</q> but He opens on us the prospect
of ambition and rivalry in its leading members,
when He warns His disciples against desiring the first
places in His kingdom; nay, of grosser sins, in His
description of the Ruler, who <q>began to strike his
fellow-servants, and to eat and drink and be drunken,</q>&mdash;passages
which have an awful significance, considering
<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>
what kind of men have before now been His chosen
representatives, and have sat in the chair of His
Apostles.
</p>

<p>
If then it be objected that Christianity does not, as
the old prophets seem to promise, abolish sin and irreligion
within its pale, we may answer, not only that it
did not engage to do so, but that actually in a prophetical
spirit it warned its followers against the expectation
of its so doing.
</p>

<p>
9.
</p>

<p>
According to our Lord's announcements before the
event, Christianity was to prevail and to become a great
empire, and to fill the earth; but it was to accomplish
this destiny, not as other victorious powers had done,
and as the Jews expected, by force of arms or by other
means of this world, but by the novel expedient of
sanctity and suffering. If some aspiring party of this
day, the great Orleans family, or a branch of the Hohenzollern,
wishing to found a kingdom, were to profess, as
their only weapon, the practice of virtue, they would
not startle us more than it startled a Jew eighteen
hundred years ago, to be told that his glorious Messiah
was not to fight, like Joshua or David, but simply to
preach. It is indeed a thought so strange, both in its
prediction and in its fulfilment, as urgently to suggest
to us that some Divine Power went with him who conceived
and proclaimed it. This is what I have been
saying;&mdash;now I wish to consider the fact, which was
predicted, in itself, without reference to its being the
subject whether of a prediction or of a fulfilment; that
<pb n='457'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>
is, the history of the rise and establishment of Christianity;
and to inquire whether it is a history that
admits of being resolved, by any philosophical ingenuity,
into the ordinary operation of moral, social, or political
causes.
</p>

<p>
As is well known, various writers have attempted to
assign human causes in explanation of the phenomenon:
Gibbon especially has mentioned five, viz. the zeal of
Christians, inherited from the Jews, their doctrine of a
future state, their claim to miraculous power, their virtues,
and their ecclesiastical organization. Let us briefly
consider them.
</p>

<p>
He thinks these five causes, when combined, will fairly
account for the event; but he has not thought of accounting
for their combination. If they are ever so available
for his purpose, still that availableness arises out of their
coincidence, and out of what does that coincidence
arise? Until this is explained, nothing is explained,
and the question had better have been let alone.
These presumed causes are quite distinct from each
other, and, I say, the wonder is, what made them
come together. How came a multitude of Gentiles
to be influenced with Jewish zeal? How came zealots
to submit to a strict, ecclesiastical <foreign rend='italic'>régime</foreign>? What
connexion has a secular <foreign rend='italic'>régime</foreign> with the immortality of
the soul? Why should immortality, a philosophical doctrine,
lead to belief in miracles, which is a superstition of the
vulgar? What tendency had miracles and magic to make
men austerely virtuous? Lastly, what power was there
in a code of virtue, as calm and enlightened as that of
Antoninus, to generate a zeal as fierce as that of Maccabæus?
<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>
Wonderful events before now have apparently
been nothing but coincidences, certainly; but they do not
become less wonderful by cataloguing their constituent
causes, unless we also show how these came to be constituent.
</p>

<p>
However, this by the way; the real question is this,&mdash;are
these historical characteristics of Christianity, also in
matter of fact, historical causes of Christianity? Has
Gibbon given proof that they are? Has he brought
evidence of their operation, or does he simply conjecture
in his private judgment that they operated? Whether
they were adapted to accomplish a certain work, is a
matter of opinion; whether they did accomplish it is a
question of fact. He ought to adduce instances of their
efficiency before he has a right to say that they are
efficient. And the second question is, what is this effect,
of which they are to be considered as causes? It is no
other than this, the conversion of bodies of men to the
Christian faith. Let us keep this in view. We have
to determine whether these five characteristics of
Christianity were efficient causes of bodies of men
becoming Christians? I think they neither did effect
such conversions, nor were adapted to do so, and for
these reasons:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. For first, as to zeal, by which Gibbon means
party spirit, or <foreign rend='italic'>esprit de corps</foreign>; this doubtless is a
motive principle when men are already members of a body, but
does it operate in bringing them into it? The Jews
were born in Judaism, they had a long and glorious history,
and would naturally feel and show <foreign rend='italic'>esprit de corps</foreign>;
but how did party spirit tend to transplant Jew or
<pb n='459'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>
Gentile out of his own place into a new society, and that
a society which as yet scarcely was formed in a society?
Zeal, certainly, may be felt for a cause, or for a person;
on this point I shall speak presently; but Gibbon's idea
of Christian zeal is nothing better than the old wine of
Judaism decanted into new Christian bottles, and would
be too flat a stimulant, even if it admitted of such a
transference, to be taken as a cause of conversion to
Christianity without definite evidence in proof of the
fact. Christians had zeal for Christianity after they
were converted, not before.
</p>

<p>
2. Next, as to the doctrine of a future state. Gibbon
seems to mean by this doctrine the fear of hell; now
certainly in this day there are persons converted from
sin to a religious life, by vivid descriptions of the future
punishment of the wicked; but then it must be recollected
that such persons already believe in the doctrine
thus urged upon them. On the contrary, give some
Tract upon hell-fire to one of the wild boys in a large
town, who has had no education, who has no faith; and,
instead of being startled by it, he will laugh at it as
something frightfully ridiculous. The belief in Styx
and Tartarus was dying out of the world at the time
that Christianity came in, as the parallel belief now seems
to be dying out in all classes of our own society. The
doctrine of eternal punishment does only anger the multitude
of men in our large towns now, and make them
blaspheme; why should it have had any other effect on
the heathen populations in the age when our Lord came?
Yet it was among those populations, that He and His
made their way from the first. As to the hope of eternal
<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>
life, that doubtless, as well as the fear of hell, was a
most operative doctrine in the case of men who had been
actually converted, of Christians brought before the
magistrate, or writhing under torture, but the thought
of eternal glory does not keep bad men from a bad life
now, and why should it convert them then from their
pleasant sins, to a heavy, mortified, joyless existence, to
a life of ill-usage, fright, contempt, and desolation?
</p>

<p>
3. That the claim to miracles should have any wide
influence in favour of Christianity among heathen populations,
who had plenty of portents of their own, is an
opinion in curious contrast with the objection against
Christianity which has provoked an answer from Paley,
viz. that <q>Christian miracles are not recited or appealed
to, by early Christian writers themselves, so fully or so
frequently as might have been expected.</q> Paley solves
the difficulty as far as it is a fact, by observing, as I
have suggested, that <q>it was their lot to contend with
magical agency, against which the mere production of
these facts was not sufficient for the convincing of their
adversaries:</q> <q>I do not know,</q> he continues, <q>whether
they themselves thought it quite decisive of the controversy.</q>
A claim to miraculous power on the part of
Christians, which was so unfrequent as to become now
an objection to the fact of their possessing it, can hardly
have been a principal cause of their success.
</p>

<p>
4. And how is it possible to imagine with Gibbon
that what he calls the <q>sober and domestic virtues</q> of
Christians, their <q>aversion to the luxury of the age,</q>
their <q>chastity, temperance, and economy,</q> that these
dull qualities were persuasives of a nature to win and
<pb n='461'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>
melt the hard heathen heart, in spite too of the dreary
prospect of the <foreign rend='italic'>barathrum</foreign>, the amphitheatre, and the
stake? Did the Christian morality by its severe beauty
make a convert of Gibbon himself? On the contrary,
he bitterly says, <q>It was not in this world that the
primitive Christians were desirous of making themselves
either agreeable or useful.</q> <q>The virtue of the primitive
Christians, like that of the first Romans, was very
frequently guarded by poverty and ignorance.</q> <q>Their
gloomy and austere aspect, their abhorrence of the
common business and pleasures of life, and their frequent
predictions of impending calamities, inspired the Pagans
with the apprehension of some danger which would arise
from the new sect.</q> Here we have not only Gibbon
hating their moral and social bearing, but his heathen
also. How then were those heathen overcome by the
amiableness of that which they viewed with such disgust?
We have here plain proof that the Christian
character repelled the heathen; where is the evidence
that it converted them?
</p>

<p>
5. Lastly, as to the ecclesiastical organization, this,
doubtless, as time went on, was a special characteristic of
the new religion; but how could it directly contribute to
its extension? Of course it gave it strength, but it did
not give it life. We are not born of bones and muscles.
It is one thing to make conquests, another to consolidate
an empire. It was before Constantine that Christians
made their great conquests. Rules are for settled times,
not for time of war. So much is this contrast felt in
the Catholic Church now, that, as is well known, in
heathen countries and in countries which have thrown off
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>
her yoke, she suspends her diocesan administration and
her Canon Law, and puts her children under the extraordinary,
extra-legal jurisdiction of Propaganda.
</p>

<p>
This is what I am led to say on Gibbon's Five Causes.
I do not deny that they might have operated now and
then; Simon Magus came to Christianity in order to
learn the craft of miracles, and Peregrinus from love of
influence and power; but Christianity made its way,
not by individual, but by broad, wholesale conversions,
and the question is, how they originated?
</p>

<p>
It is very remarkable that it should not have occurred
to a man of Gibbon's sagacity to inquire, what
account the Christians themselves gave of the matter.
Would it not have been worth while for him to have let
conjecture alone, and to have looked for facts instead?
Why did he not try the hypothesis of faith, hope, and
charity? Did he never hear of repentance towards God,
and faith in Christ? Did he not recollect the many words
of Apostles, Bishops, Apologists, Martyrs, all forming
one testimony? No; such thoughts are close upon him,
and close upon the truth; but he cannot sympathize
with them, he cannot believe in them, he cannot even
enter into them, <emph>because</emph> he needs the due formation of
mind.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide supra</hi>, pp. 341,
375, 413-416.</note> Let us see whether the facts of the case do not
come out clear and unequivocal, if we will but have the
patience to endure them.
</p>

<p>
A Deliverer of the human race through the Jewish
nation had been promised from time immemorial. The
day came when He was to appear, and He was eagerly
<pb n='463'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>
expected; moreover, One actually did make His appearance
at that date in Palestine, and claimed to be He.
He left the earth without apparently doing much for
the object of His coming. But when He was gone, His
disciples took upon themselves to go forth to preach to
all parts of the earth with the object of preaching <emph>Him</emph>,
and collecting converts <emph>in His Name</emph>. After a little while
they are found wonderfully to have succeeded. Large
bodies of men in various places are to be seen, professing
to be His disciples, owning Him as their King, and
continually swelling in number and penetrating into
the populations of the Roman Empire; at length they
convert the Empire itself. All this is historical fact.
Now, we want to know the farther historical fact, viz.
the cause of their conversion; in other words, what were
the topics of that preaching which was so effective? If
we believe what is told us by the preachers and their
converts, the answer is plain. They <q>preached Christ;</q>
they called on men to believe, hope, and place their
affections, in that Deliverer who had come and gone; and
the moral instrument by which they persuaded them to
do so, was a description of the life, character, mission,
and power of that Deliverer, a promise of His invisible
Presence and Protection here, and of the Vision and
Fruition of Him hereafter. From first to last to
Christians, as to Abraham, He Himself is the centre and
fulness of the dispensation. They, as Abraham, <q>see
His day, and are glad.</q>
</p>

<p>
A temporal sovereign makes himself felt by means of
his subordinate administrators, who bring his power and
will to bear upon every individual of his subjects who
<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>
personally know him not; the universal Deliverer, long
expected, when He came, He too, instead of making and
securing subjects by a visible graciousness or majesty,
departs;&mdash;<emph>but</emph> is found, through His preachers, to have
imprinted the Image<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vide supra.</hi></note>
or Idea of Himself in the minds of
His subjects individually; and that Image, apprehended
and worshipped in individual minds, becomes a principle
of association, and a real bond of those subjects one with
another, who are thus united to the body by being united
to that Image; and moreover that Image, which is their
moral life, when they have been already converted, is
also the original instrument of their conversion. It is the
Image of Him who fulfils the one great need of human
nature, the Healer of its wounds, the Physician of the
soul, this Image it is which both creates faith, and then
rewards it.
</p>

<p>
When we recognize this central Image as the vivifying
idea both of the Christian body and of individuals in it,
then, certainly, we are able to take into account at least
two of Gibbon's causes, as having, in connexion with
that idea, some influence both in making converts and in
strengthening them to persevere. It was the Thought
of Christ, not a corporate body or a doctrine, which
inspired that zeal which the historian so poorly comprehends;
and it was the Thought of Christ which gave a
life to the promise of that eternity, which without Him
would be, in any soul, nothing short of an intolerable
burden.
</p>

<p>
Now a mental vision such as this, perhaps will be
called cloudy, fanciful, unintelligible; that is, in other
<pb n='465'/><anchor id='Pg465'/>
words, miraculous. I think it is so. How, without
the Hand of God, could a new idea, one and the
same, enter at once into myriads of men, women,
and children of all ranks, especially the lower, and
have power to wean them from their indulgences and
sins, and to nerve them against the most cruel tortures,
and to last in vigour as a sustaining influence
for seven or eight generations, till it founded an extended
polity, broke the obstinacy of the strongest and
wisest government which the world has ever seen, and
forced its way from its first caves and catacombs to the
fulness of imperial power?
</p>

<p>
In considering this subject, I shall confine myself to
the proof, as far as my limits allow, of two points,&mdash;first,
that this Thought or Image of Christ was the principle
of conversion and of fellowship; and next, that among the
lower classes, who had no power, influence, reputation, or
education, lay its principal success.<note place='foot'>Had my
limits allowed it, I ought, as a third subject, to have described
the existing system of impure idolatry, and the wonderful
phenomenon of such multitudes, who had been slaves to it, escaping from
it by the power of Christianity,&mdash;under the guidance of the great work
(<q>On the Gentile and the Jew</q>) of Dr. Döllinger.</note>
</p>

<p>
As to the vivifying idea, this is St. Paul's account of
it: <q>I make known to you the gospel which I preached
to you, which also you have received, and wherein you
stand; by which also you are saved. For I delivered to
you first of all that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,</q> &amp;c.,
&amp;c. <q>I am the least of the Apostles; but, whether I or
they, so we preached, and so you believed.</q> <q>It has
<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/>
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them
that believe.</q> <q>We preach Christ crucified.</q> <q>I determined
to know nothing among you, but Jesus Christ,
and Him crucified.</q> <q>Your life is hid with Christ in
God. When Christ, who is your life, shall appear, then
you also shall appear with Him in glory.</q> <q>I live, but
now not I, but Christ liveth in me.</q>
</p>

<p>
St. Peter, who has been accounted the master of a
separate school, says the same: <q>Jesus Christ, whom
you have not seen, yet love; in whom you now believe,
and shall rejoice.</q>
</p>

<p>
And St. John, who is sometimes accounted a third
master in Christianity: <q>It hath not yet appeared what
we shall be; but we know that, when He shall appear,
we shall be like to Him, because we shall see Him as
He is.</q>
</p>

<p>
That their disciples followed them in this sovereign
devotion to an Invisible Lord, will appear as I proceed.
</p>

<p>
And next, as to the worldly position and character of
His disciples, our Lord, in the well-known passage,
returns thanks to His Heavenly Father <q>because,</q> He
says, <q>Thou hast hid these things</q>&mdash;the mysteries of
His kingdom&mdash;<q>from the wise and prudent, and hast
revealed them to little ones.</q> And, in accordance with
this announcement, St. Paul says that <q>not many wise
men according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble,</q> became Christians. He, indeed, is one of those
few; so were others his contemporaries, and, as time
went on, the number of these exceptions increased, so
that converts were found, not a few, in the high places
of the Empire, and in the schools of philosophy and
<pb n='467'/><anchor id='Pg467'/>
learning; but still the rule held, that the great mass of
Christians were to be found in those classes which were
of no account in the world, whether on the score of rank
or of education.
</p>

<p>
We all know this was the case with our Lord and His
Apostles. It seems almost irreverent to speak of their
temporal employments, when we are so simply accustomed
to consider them in their spiritual associations; but it
is profitable to remind ourselves that our Lord Himself
was a sort of smith, and made ploughs and cattle-yokes.
Four Apostles were fishermen, one a petty tax collector,
two husbandmen, and another is said to have been a
market gardener.<note place='foot'>On the subjects which follow,
<hi rend='italic'>vide</hi> Lami, <hi rend='italic'>De Eruditione Apostolorum</hi>;
Mamachius, <hi rend='italic'>Origines Christ.</hi>; Ruinart, <hi rend='italic'>Act.
Mart.</hi>; Lardner, <hi rend='italic'>Credibility</hi>, &amp;c.; Fleury,
<hi rend='italic'>Eccles. Hist.</hi>; Kortholt, <hi rend='italic'>Calumn. Pagan.</hi>; and
<hi rend='italic'>De Morib. Christ.</hi>, &amp;c.</note> When Peter and John were brought
before the Council, they are spoken of as being, in a
secular point of view, <q>illiterate men, and of the lower
sort,</q> and thus they are spoken of in a later age by the
Fathers.
</p>

<p>
That their converts were of the same rank as themselves,
is reported, in their favour or to their discredit,
by friends and enemies, for four centuries. <q>If a man
be educated,</q> says Celsus in mockery, <q>let him keep
clear of us Christians; we want no men of wisdom, no
men of sense. We account all such as evil. No; but, if
there be one who is inexperienced, or stupid, or untaught,
or a fool, let him come with good heart.</q> <q>They are
weavers,</q> he says elsewhere, <q>shoemakers, fullers, illiterate,
clowns.</q> <q>Fools, low-born fellows,</q> says Trypho.
<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/>
<q>The greater part of you,</q> says Cæcilius, <q>are worn with
want, cold, toil, and famine; men collected from the
lowest dregs of the people; ignorant, credulous women;</q>
<q>unpolished, boors, illiterate, ignorant even of the sordid
arts of life; they do not understand even civil matters,
how can they understand divine?</q> <q>They have left
their tongs, mallets, and anvils, to preach about the
things of heaven,</q> says Libanius. <q>They deceive women,
servants, and slaves,</q> says Julian. The author of Philopatris
speaks of them as <q>poor creatures, blocks, withered
old fellows, men of downcast and pale visages.</q> As to
their religion, it had the reputation popularly, according
to various Fathers, of being an anile superstition, the
discovery of old women, a joke, a madness, an infatuation,
an absurdity, a fanaticism.
</p>

<p>
The Fathers themselves confirm these statements, so
far as they relate to the insignificance and ignorance of
their brethren. Athenagoras speaks of the virtue of their
<q>ignorant men, mechanics, and old women.</q> <q>They are
gathered,</q> says St. Jerome, <q>not from the Academy or
Lyceum, but from the low populace.</q> <q>They are whitesmiths,
servants, farm-labourers, woodmen, men of sordid
trades, beggars,</q> says Theodoret. <q>We are engaged in
the farm, in the market, at the baths, wine-shops, stables,
and fairs; as seamen, as soldiers, as peasants, as dealers,</q>
says Tertullian. How came such men to be converted?
and, being converted, how came such men to overturn
the world? Yet they went forth from the first, <q>conquering
and to conquer.</q>
</p>

<p>
The first manifestation of their formidable numbers is
made just about the time when St. Peter and St. Paul
<pb n='469'/><anchor id='Pg469'/>
suffered martyrdom, and was the cause of a terrible persecution.
We have the account of it in Tacitus. <q>Nero,</q>
he says, <q>to put an end to the common talk [that Rome
had been set on fire by his order], imputed it to others,
visiting with a refinement of punishment those detestable
criminals who went by the name of Christians. The
author of that denomination was Christus, who had been
executed in Tiberius's time by the procurator, Pontius
Pilate. The pestilent superstition, checked for a while,
burst out again, not only throughout Judea, the first
seat of the evil, but even throughout Rome, the centre
both of confluence and outbreak of all that is atrocious
and disgraceful from every quarter. First were arrested
those who made no secret of their sect; and by this clue
a vast multitude of others, convicted, not so much of
firing the city, as of hatred to the human race. Mockery
was added to death; clad in skins of beasts, they were
torn to pieces by dogs; they were nailed up to crosses;
they were made inflammable, so that, when day failed,
they might serve as lights. Hence, guilty as they
were, and deserving of exemplary punishment, they
excited compassion, as being destroyed, not for the
public welfare, but from the cruelty of one man.</q>
</p>

<p>
The two Apostles suffered, and a silence follows of a
whole generation. At the end of thirty or forty years,
Pliny, the friend of Trajan, as well as of Tacitus, is sent
as that Emperor's Proprætor into Bithynia, and is startled
and perplexed by the number, influence, and pertinacity
of the Christians whom he finds there, and in the neighbouring
province of Pontus. He has the opportunity of
being far more fair to them than his friend the historian.
<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/>
He writes to Trajan to know how he ought to
deal with them, and I will quote some portions of his
letter.
</p>

<p>
He says he does not know how to proceed with them,
as their religion has not received toleration from the state.
He never was present at any trial of them; he doubted
whether the children among them, as well as grown
people, ought to be accounted as culprits, whether recantation
would set matters right, or whether they
incurred punishment all the same; whether they were
to be punished, merely because Christians, even though
no definite crime was proved against them. His way
had been to examine them, and put questions to them;
if they confessed the charge, he gave them one or two
chances, threatening them with punishment; then, if
they persisted, he gave orders for their execution.
<q>For,</q> he argues, <q>I felt no doubt that, whatever
might be the character of their opinions, stubborn and
inflexible obstinacy deserved punishment. Others there
were of a like infatuation, whom, being citizens, I sent to
Rome.</q>
</p>

<p>
Some satisfied him; they repeated after him an invocation
to the gods, and offered wine and incense to the
Emperor's image, and in addition, cursed the name of
Christ. <q>Accordingly,</q> he says, <q>I let them go; for
I am told nothing can compel a real Christian to do any
of these things.</q> There were others, too, who sacrificed;
who had been Christians, some of them for as many as
twenty years.
</p>

<p>
Then he is curious to know something more definite
about them. <q>This, the informers told me, was the
<pb n='471'/><anchor id='Pg471'/>
whole of their crime or mistake, that they were accustomed
to assemble on a stated day before dawn, and to
say together a hymn to Christ as a god, and to bind
themselves by an oath [sacramento] (not to any crime,
but on the contrary) to keep from theft, robbery, adultery,
breach of promise, and making free with deposits.
After this they used to separate, and then to meet again
for a meal, which was social and harmless. However,
they left even that off, after my Edict against their
meeting.</q>
</p>

<p>
This information led him to put to the torture two
maid-servants, <q>who were called ministers,</q> in order to
find out what was true, what was false in it; but he says
he could make out nothing, except a depraved and excessive
superstition. This is what led him to consult the
Emperor, <q>especially because of the number who were
implicated in it; for these are, or are likely to be, many, of
all ages, nay, of both sexes. For the contagion of this
superstition has spread, not only in the cities, but about
the villages and the open country.</q> He adds that
already there was some improvement. <q>The almost
forsaken temples begin to be filled again, and the sacred
solemnities after a long intermission are revived. Victims,
too, are again on sale, purchasers having been most
rare to find.</q>
</p>

<p>
The salient points in this account are these, that, at
the end of one generation from the Apostles, nay, almost
in the lifetime of St. John, Christians had so widely
spread in a large district of Asia, as nearly to suppress
the Pagan religions there; that they were people of
exemplary lives; that they had a name for invincible
<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/>
fidelity to their religion; that no threats or sufferings
could make them deny it; and that their only tangible
characteristic was the worship of our Lord.
</p>

<p>
This was at the beginning of the second century; not
a great many years after, we have another account of
the Christian body, from an anonymous Greek Christian,
in a letter to a friend whom he was anxious to convert.
It is far too long to quote, and difficult to compress;
but a few sentences will show how strikingly it agrees
with the account of the heathen Pliny, especially in two
points,&mdash;first, in the numbers of the Christians, secondly,
on devotion to our Lord as the vivifying principle of
their association.
</p>

<p>
<q>Christians,</q> says the writer, <q rend='pre'>differ not from other
men in country, or speech, or customs. They do not live
in cities of their own, or speak in any peculiar dialect,
or adopt any strange modes of living. They inhabit
their native countries, but as sojourners; they take their
part in all burdens, as if citizens, and in all sufferings,
as if they were strangers. In foreign countries they
recognize a home, and in every home they see a foreign
country. They marry like other men, but do not disown
their children. They obey the established laws, but they
go beyond them in the tenor of their lives. They love
all men, and are persecuted by all; they are not known,
and they are condemned; they are poor, and make many
rich; they are dishonoured, yet in dishonour they are
glorified; they are slandered, and they are cleared; they
are called names, and they bless. By the Jews they
are assailed as aliens, by the Greeks they are persecuted,
nor can they who hate them say why.</q>
</p>

<pb n='473'/><anchor id='Pg473'/>

<p>
<q>Christians are in the world, as the soul in the body.
The soul pervades the limbs of the body, and Christians
the cities of the world. The flesh hates the soul, and
wars against it, though suffering no wrong from it; and
the world hates Christians. The soul loves the flesh
that hates it, and Christians love their enemies. Their
tradition is not an earthly invention, nor is it a mortal
thought which they so carefully guard, nor a dispensation
of human mysteries which is committed to their
charge; but God Himself, the Omnipotent and Invisible
Creator, has from heaven established among men His
Truth and His Word, the Holy and Incomprehensible,
and has deeply fixed the same in their hearts; not, as
might be expected, sending any servant, angel, or prince,
or administrator of things earthly or heavenly, but the
very Artificer and Demiurge of the Universe. Him God
hath sent to man, not to inflict terror, but in clemency
and gentleness, as a King sending a King who was His
Son; He sent Him as God to men, to save them. He
hated not, nor rejected us, nor remembered our guilt,
but showed Himself long-suffering, and, in His own
words, bore our sins. He gave His own Son as a ransom
for us, the just for the unjust. For what other
thing, except His Righteousness, could cover our guilt?
In whom was it possible for us, lawless sinners, to find
justification, save in the Son of God alone? O sweet
interchange! O heavenly workmanship past finding
out! O benefits exceeding expectation! Sending, then,
a Saviour, who is able to save those who of themselves
are incapable of salvation, He has willed that we should
regard Him as our Guardian, Father, Teacher, Counsellor,
<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/>
Physician; our Mind, Light, Honour, Glory, Strength,
and Life.<note place='foot'>Ep. ad Diognet.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
The writing from which I have been quoting is of the
early part of the second century. Twenty or thirty years
after it St. Justin Martyr speaks as strongly of the
spread of the new Religion: <q>There is not any one race
of men,</q> he says, <q>barbarian or Greek, nay, of those
who live in waggons, or who are Nomads, or Shepherds
in tents, among whom prayers and eucharists are not
offered to the Father and Maker of the Universe, through
the name of the crucified Jesus.</q>
</p>

<p>
Towards the end of the century, Clement:&mdash;<q>The
word of our Master did not remain in Judea, as philosophy
remained in Greece, but has been poured out over
the whole world, persuading Greeks and Barbarians
alike, race by race, village by village, every city, whole
houses, and hearers one by one, nay, not a few of the
philosophers themselves.</q>
</p>

<p>
And Tertullian, at the very close of it, could in his
<hi rend='italic'>Apologia</hi> even proceed to threaten the Roman Government:&mdash;<q>We
are a people of yesterday,</q> he says; <q>and
yet we have filled every place belonging to you, cities,
islands, castles, towns, assemblies, your very camp, your
tribes, companies, palaces, senate, forum. We leave you
your temples only. We can count your armies, and our
numbers in a single province will be greater. In what
war with you should we not be sufficient and ready, even
though unequal in numbers, who so willingly are put to
death, if it were not in this Religion of ours more lawful
to be slain than to slay?</q>
</p>

<pb n='475'/><anchor id='Pg475'/>

<p>
Once more, let us hear the great Origen, in the
early part of the next century:&mdash;<q>In all Greece and
in all barbarous races within our world, there are tens of
thousands who have left their national laws and customary
gods for the law of Moses and the word of Jesus
Christ; though to adhere to that law is to incur the
hatred of idolaters, and the risk of death besides to
have embraced that word. And considering how, in
so few years, in spite of the attacks made on us, to
the loss of life or property, and with no great store
of teachers, the preaching of that word has found its
way into every part of the world, so that Greek and
barbarians, wise and unwise, adhere to the religion of
Jesus, doubtless it is a work greater than any work of
man.</q>
</p>

<p>
We need no proof to assure us that this steady and
rapid growth of Christianity was a phenomenon which
startled its contemporaries, as much as it excites the
curiosity of philosophic historians now; and they too
then had their own ways of accounting for it, different
indeed from Gibbon's, but quite as pertinent, though
less elaborate. These were principally two, both leading
them to persecute it,&mdash;the obstinacy of the Christians
and their magical powers, of which the former was the
explanation adopted by educated minds, and the latter
chiefly by the populace.
</p>

<p>
As to the former, from first to last, men in power
magisterially reprobate the senseless obstinacy of the
members of the new sect, as their characteristic offence.
Pliny, as we have seen, found it to be their only fault,
but one sufficient to merit capital punishment. The
<pb n='476'/><anchor id='Pg476'/>
Emperor Marcus seems to consider obstinacy the ultimate
motive-cause to which their unnatural conduct
was traceable. After speaking of the soul, as <q>ready,
if it must now be separated from the body, to be extinguished,
or dissolved, or to remain with it;</q> he adds,
<q>but the readiness must come of its own judgment, not
from simple perverseness, as in the case of Christians,
but with considerateness, with gravity, and without
theatrical effect, so as to be persuasive.</q> And Diocletian,
in his Edict of persecution, professes it to be his
<q>earnest aim to punish the depraved persistence of
those most wicked men.</q>
</p>

<p>
As to the latter charge, their founder, it was said, had
gained a knowledge of magic in Egypt, and had left
behind him in his sacred books the secrets of the art.
Suetonius himself speaks of them as <q>men of a magical
superstition;</q> and Celsus accuses them of <q>incantations
in the name of demons.</q> The officer who had custody of
St. Perpetua, feared her escape from prison <q>by magical
incantations.</q> When St. Tiburtius had walked barefoot
on hot coals, his judge cried out that Christ had
taught him magic. St. Anastasia was thrown into
prison as dealing in poisons; the populace called
out against St. Agnes, <q>Away with the witch! away
with the sorceress!</q> When St. Bonosus and St.
Maximilian bore the burning pitch without shrinking,
Jews and heathen cried out, <q>Those wizards and
sorcerers!</q> <q>What new delusion,</q> says the magistrate
concerning St. Romanus, in the Hymn of Prudentius,
<q>has brought in these sophists who deny the
worship of the Gods? how doth this chief sorcerer
<pb n='477'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>
mock us, stilled by his Thessalian charm to laugh
at punishment?<note place='foot'>Essay on Development of Doctrine, ch. iv. § 1.</note></q>
</p>

<p>
It is indeed difficult to enter into the feelings of
irritation and fear, of contempt and amazement, which
were excited, whether in the town populace or in the
magistrates in the presence of conduct so novel, so unvarying,
so absolutely beyond their comprehension. The
very young and the very old, the child, the youth in the
heyday of his passions, the sober man of middle age,
maidens and mothers of families, boors and slaves as well
as philosophers and nobles, solitary confessors and companies
of men and women,&mdash;all these were seen equally to
defy the powers of darkness to do their worst. In this
strange encounter it became a point of honour with the
Roman to break the determination of his victim, and it
was the triumph of faith when his most savage expedients
for that purpose were found to be in vain. The
martyrs shrank from suffering like other men, but such
natural shrinking was incommensurable with apostasy.
No intensity of torture had any means of affecting what
was a mental conviction; and the sovereign Thought in
which they had lived was their adequate support and consolation
in their death. To them the prospect of wounds
and loss of limbs was not more terrible than it is to the
combatant of this world. They faced the implements of
torture as the soldier takes his post before the enemy's
battery. They cheered and ran forward to meet his
attack, and as it were dared him, if he would, to destroy
the numbers who kept closing up the foremost rank,
as their comrades who had filled it fell. And when
<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/>
Rome at last found she had to deal with a host of
Scævolas, then the proudest of earthly sovereignties,
arrayed in the completeness of her material resources,
humbled herself before a power which was founded on a
mere sense of the unseen.
</p>

<p>
In the colloquy of the aged Ignatius, the disciple of
the Apostles, with the Emperor Trajan, we have a sort of
type of what went on for three, or rather four centuries.
He was sent all the way from Antioch to Rome to be
devoured by the beasts in the amphitheatre. As he
travelled, he wrote letters to various Christian Churches,
and among others to his Roman brethren, among whom he
was to suffer. Let us see whether, as I have said, the
Image of that Divine King, who had been promised from
the beginning, was not the living principle of his obstinate
resolve. The old man is almost fierce in his determination
to be martyred. <q>May those beasts,</q> he says to his
brethren, <q>be my gain, which are in readiness for me! I
will provoke and coax them to devour me quickly, and
not to be afraid of me, as they are of some whom they
will not touch. Should they be unwilling, I will compel
them. Bear with me; I know what is my gain. Now I
begin to be a disciple. Of nothing of things visible or invisible
am I ambitious, save to gain Christ. Whether it is
fire or the cross, the assault of wild beasts, the wrenching
of my bones, the crunching of my limbs, the crushing of
my whole body, let the tortures of the devil all assail me,
if I do but gain Christ Jesus.</q> Elsewhere in the same
Epistle he says, <q>I write to you, still alive, but longing
to die. My Love is crucified! I have no taste for perishable
food. I long for God's Bread, heavenly Bread,
<pb n='479'/><anchor id='Pg479'/>
Bread of life, which is Flesh of Jesus Christ, the Son of
God. I long for God's draught, His Blood, which is
Love without corruption, and Life for evermore.</q> It is
said that, when he came into the presence of Trajan, the
latter cried out, <q>Who are you, poor devil, who are so
eager to transgress our rules?</q> <q>That is no name,</q> he
answered, <q>for Theophorus.</q> <q>Who is Theophorus?</q>
asked the Emperor. <q>He who bears Christ in his
breast.</q> In the Apostle's words, already cited, he had
<q>Christ in him, the hope of glory.</q> All this may be
called enthusiasm; but enthusiasm affords a much more
adequate explanation of the confessorship of an old man,
than do Gibbon's five reasons.
</p>

<p>
Instances of the same ardent spirit, and of the living
faith on which it was founded, are to be found wherever
we open the <hi rend='italic'>Acta Martyrum</hi>. In the outbreak at Smyrna,
in the middle of the second century, amid tortures
which even moved the heathen bystanders to compassion,
the sufferers were conspicuous for their serene calmness.
<q>They made it evident to us all,</q> says the Epistle of the
Church, <q>that in the midst of those sufferings they were
absent from the body, or rather, that the Lord stood by
them, and walked in the midst of them.</q>
</p>

<p>
At that time Polycarp, the familiar friend of St. John,
and a contemporary of Ignatius, suffered in his extreme
old age. When, before his sentence, the Proconsul bade
him <q>swear by the fortunes of Cæsar, and have done
with Christ,</q> his answer betrayed that intimate devotion
to the self-same Idea, which had been the inward life of
Ignatius. <q>Eighty and six years,</q> he answered, <q>have
I been His servant, and He has never wronged me, but
<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/>
ever has preserved me; and how can I blaspheme my
King and my Saviour?</q> When they would have fastened
him to the stake, he said, <q>Let alone; He who gives me
to bear the fire, will give me also to stand firm upon the
pyre without your nails.</q>
</p>

<p>
Christians felt it as an acceptable service to Him who
loved them, to confess with courage and to suffer with
dignity. In this chivalrous spirit, as it may be called,
they met the words and deeds of their persecutors, as the
children of men return bitterness for bitterness, and blow
for blow. <q>What soldier,</q> says Minucius, with a reference
to the invisible Presence of our Lord, <q>does not
challenge danger more daringly under the eye of his
commander?</q> In that same outbreak at Smyrna, when
the Proconsul urged the young Germanicus to have
mercy on himself and on his youth, to the astonishment
of the populace he provoked a wild beast to fall upon
him. In like manner, St. Justin tells us of Lucius, who,
when he saw a Christian sent off to suffer, at once
remonstrated sharply with the judge, and was sent off to
execution with him; and then another presented himself,
and was sent off also. When the Christians were thrown
into prison, in the fierce persecution at Lyons, Vettius
Epagathus, a youth of distinction who had given himself
to an ascetic life, could not bear the sight of the
sufferings of his brethren, and asked leave to plead their
cause. The only answer he got was to be sent off the
first to die. What the contemporary account sees in his
conduct is, not that he was zealous for his brethren,
though zealous he was, nor that he believed in miracles,
though he doubtless did believe; but that he <q>was a
<pb n='481'/><anchor id='Pg481'/>
gracious disciple of Christ, following the Lamb whithersoever
He went.</q>
</p>

<p>
In that memorable persecution, when Blandina, a
slave, was seized for confessorship, her mistress and her
fellow-Christians dreaded lest, from her delicate make,
she should give way under the torments; but she even
tired out her tormentors. It was a refreshment and relief
to her to cry out amid her pains, <q>I am a Christian.</q>
They remanded her to prison, and then brought her out
for fresh suffering a second day and a third. On the last
day she saw a boy of fifteen brought into the amphitheatre
for death; she feared for him, as others had feared for
her; but he too went through his trial generously, and
went to God before her. Her last sufferings were to be
placed in the notorious red-hot chair, and then to be
exposed in a net to a wild bull; they finished by cutting
her throat. Sanctus, too, when the burning plates of
brass were placed on his limbs, all through his torments
did but say, <q>I am a Christian,</q> and stood erect and
firm, <q>bathed and strengthened,</q> say his brethren who
write the account, <q>in the heavenly well of living water
which flows from the breast of Christ,</q> or, as they say
elsewhere of all the martyrs, <q>refreshed with the joy of
martyrdom, the hope of blessedness, love towards Christ,
and the spirit of God the Father.</q> How clearly do we
see all through this narrative what it was which nerved
them for the combat! If they love their brethren, it is
in the fellowship of their Lord; if they look for heaven,
it is because He is the Light of it.
</p>

<p>
Epipodius, a youth of gentle nurture, when struck by
the Prefect on the mouth, while blood flowed from it,
<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/>
cried out, <q>I confess that Jesus Christ is God, together
with the Father and the Holy Ghost.</q> Symphorian, of
Autun, also a youth, and of noble birth, when told to
adore an idol, answered, <q>Give me leave, and I will
hammer it to pieces.</q> When Leonidas, the father of the
young Origen, was in prison for his faith, the boy, then
seventeen, burned to share his martyrdom, and his mother
had to hide his clothes to prevent him from executing
his purpose. Afterwards he attended the confessors in
prison, stood by them at the tribunal, and gave them
the kiss of peace when they were led out to suffer, and
this, in spite of being several times apprehended and put
upon the rack. Also in Alexandria, the beautiful slave,
Potamiæna, when about to be stripped in order to be
thrown into the cauldron of hot pitch, said to the Prefect,
<q>I pray you rather let me be dipped down slowly into
it with my clothes on, and you shall see with what
patience I am gifted by Him of whom you are ignorant,
Jesus Christ.</q> When the populace in the same city had
beaten out the aged Apollonia's teeth, and lit a fire to
burn her, unless she would blaspheme, she leaped into
the fire herself, and so gained her crown. When Sixtus,
Bishop of Rome, was led to martyrdom, his deacon,
Laurence, followed him weeping and complaining, <q>O
my father, whither goest thou without thy son?</q> And
when his own turn came, three days afterwards, and he
was put upon the gridiron, after a while he said to the
Prefect, <q>Turn me; this side is done.</q> Whence came
this tremendous spirit, scaring, nay, offending, the fastidious
criticism of our delicate days? Does Gibbon think
to sound the depths of the eternal ocean with the
<pb n='483'/><anchor id='Pg483'/>
tape and measuring-rod of his merely literary philosophy?
</p>

<p>
When Barulas, a child of seven years old, was scourged
to blood for repeating his catechism before the heathen
judge&mdash;viz. <q>There is but one God, and Jesus Christ is
true God</q>&mdash;his mother encouraged him to persevere,
chiding him for asking for some drink. At Merida, a
girl of noble family, of the age of twelve, presented herself
before the tribunal, and overturned the idols. She
was scourged and burned with torches; she neither shed
a tear, nor showed other signs of suffering. When the
fire reached her face, she opened her mouth to receive it,
and was suffocated. At Cæsarea, a girl, under eighteen,
went boldly to ask the prayers of some Christians who
were in chains before the Prætorium. She was seized
at once, and her sides torn open with the iron rakes,
preserving the while a bright and joyous countenance.
Peter, Dorotheus, Gorgonius, were boys of the imperial
bedchamber; they were highly in favour with their
masters, and were Christians. They too suffered dreadful
torments, dying under them, without a shadow of
wavering. Call such conduct madness, if you will, or
magic: but do not mock us by ascribing it in such mere
children to simple desire of immortality, or to any ecclesiastical
organization.
</p>

<p>
When the persecution raged in Asia, a vast multitude
of Christians presented themselves before the Proconsul,
challenging him to proceed against them. <q>Poor
wretches!</q> half in contempt and half in affright, he
answered, <q>if you must die, cannot you find ropes or
precipices for the purpose?</q> At Utica, a hundred and
<pb n='484'/><anchor id='Pg484'/>
fifty Christians of both sexes and all ages were martyrs in
one company. They are said to have been told to burn
incense to an idol, or they should be thrown into a pit of
burning lime; they without hesitation leapt into it. In
Egypt a hundred and twenty confessors, after having
sustained the loss of eyes or of feet, endured to linger out
their lives in the mines of Palestine and Cilicia. In the
last persecution, according to the testimony of the grave
Eusebius, a contemporary, the slaughter of men, women,
and children, went on by twenties, sixties, hundreds, till
the instruments of execution were worn out, and the
executioners could kill no more. Yet he tells us, as an
eye-witness, that, as soon as any Christians were condemned,
others ran from all parts, and surrounded the
tribunals, confessing the faith, and joyfully receiving
their condemnation, and singing songs of thanksgiving
and triumph to the last.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Thus was the Roman power overcome. Thus did the
Seed of Abraham, and the Expectation of the Gentiles,
the meek Son of man, <q>take to Himself His great power
and reign</q> in the hearts of His people, in the public
theatre of the world. The mode in which the primeval
prophecy was fulfilled is as marvellous, as the prophecy
itself is clear and bold.
</p>

<p>
<q>So may all Thy enemies perish, O Lord; but let them
that love Thee shine, as the sun shineth in his rising!</q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
I will add the memorable words of the two great
Apologists of the period:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Your cruelty,</q> says Tertullian, <q>though each act be
<pb n='485'/><anchor id='Pg485'/>
more refined than the last, doth profit you nothing. To
our sect it is rather an inducement. We grow up in
greater numbers, as often as you cut us down. The
blood of the martyrs is their seed for the harvest.</q>
</p>

<p>
Origen even uses the language of prophecy. To the
objection of Celsus that Christianity from its principles
would, if let alone, open the whole empire to the irruption
of the barbarians, and the utter ruin of civilization, he
replies, <q>If all Romans are such as we, then too the
barbarians will draw near to the Word of God, and will
become the most observant of the Law. And every
worship shall come to nought, and that of the Christians
alone obtain the mastery, for the Word is continually
gaining possession of more and more souls.</q>
</p>

<p>
One additional remark:&mdash;It was fitting that those
mixed unlettered multitudes, who for three centuries had
suffered and triumphed by virtue of the inward Vision of
their Divine Lord, should be selected, as we know they
were, in the fourth, to be the special champions of His
Divinity and the victorious foes of its impugners, at a
time when the civil power, which had found them too
strong for its arms, attempted, by means of a portentous
heresy in the high places of the Church, to rob them of
that Truth which had all along been the principle of their
strength.
</p>

<p>
10.
</p>

<p>
I have been forestalling all along the thought with
which I shall close these considerations on the subject of
Christianity; and necessarily forestalling it, because, it
properly comes first, though the course which my
<pb n='486'/><anchor id='Pg486'/>
argument has taken has not allowed me to introduce it
in its natural place. Revelation begins where Natural
Religion fails. The Religion of Nature is a mere
inchoation, and needs a complement,&mdash;it can have but
one complement, and that very complement is Christianity.
</p>

<p>
Natural Religion is based upon the sense of sin; it
recognizes the disease, but it cannot find, it does but look
out for the remedy. That remedy, both for guilt and for
moral impotence, is found in the central doctrine of Revelation,
the Mediation of Christ. I need not go into a
subject so familiar to all men in a Christian country.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is that Christianity is the fulfilment of the
promise made to Abraham, and of the Mosaic revelations;
this is how it has been able from the first to occupy the
world and gain a hold on every class of human society
to which its preachers reached; this is why the Roman
power and the multitude of religions which it embraced
could not stand against it; this is the secret of its sustained
energy, and its never-flagging martyrdoms; this
is how at present it is so mysteriously potent, in spite of
the new and fearful adversaries which beset its path. It
has with it that gift of staunching and healing the one
deep wound of human nature, which avails more for its
success than a full encyclopedia of scientific knowledge
and a whole library of controversy, and therefore it must
last while human nature lasts. It is a living truth
which never can grow old.
</p>

<p>
Some persons speak of it as if it were a thing of history,
with only indirect bearings upon modern times; I cannot
allow that it is a mere historical religion. Certainly it
<pb n='487'/><anchor id='Pg487'/>
has its foundations in past and glorious memories, but
its power is in the present. It is no dreary matter
of antiquarianism; we do not contemplate it in conclusions
drawn from dumb documents and dead events,
but by faith exercised in ever-living objects, and by the
appropriation and use of ever-recurring gifts.
</p>

<p>
Our communion with it is in the unseen, not in the
obsolete. At this very day its rites and ordinances are continually
eliciting the active interposition of that Omnipotence
in which the Religion long ago began. First and
above all is the Holy Mass, in which He who once died
for us upon the Cross, brings back and perpetuates, by
His literal presence in it, that one and the same sacrifice
which cannot be repeated. Next, there is the actual
entrance of Himself, soul and body, and divinity, into the
soul and body of every worshipper who comes to Him for
the gift, a privilege more intimate than if we lived with
Him during His long-past sojourn upon earth. And then,
moreover, there is His personal abidance in our churches,
raising earthly service into a foretaste of heaven. Such is
the profession of Christianity, and, I repeat, its very
divination of our needs is in itself a proof that it is really
the supply of them.
</p>

<p>
Upon the doctrines which I have mentioned as central
truths, others, as we all know, follow, which rule our personal
conduct and course of life, and our social and civil
relations. The promised Deliverer, the Expectation of the
nations, has not done His work by halves. He has given
us Saints and Angels for our protection. He has taught
us how by our prayers and services to benefit our departed
friends, and to keep up a memorial of ourselves when we
<pb n='488'/><anchor id='Pg488'/>
are gone. He has created a visible hierarchy and a
succession of sacraments, to be the channels of His
mercies, and the Crucifix secures the thought of Him in
every house and chamber. In all these ways He brings
Himself before us. I am not here speaking of His gifts
as gifts, but as memorials; not as what Christians know
they convey, but in their visible character; and I say,
that, as human nature itself is still in life and action as
much as ever it was, so He too lives, to our imaginations,
by His visible symbols, as if He were on earth, with a
practical efficacy which even unbelievers cannot deny, to
be the corrective of that nature, and its strength day by
day, and that this power of perpetuating His Image,
being altogether singular and special, and the prerogative
of Him and Him alone, is a grand evidence how
well He fulfils to this day that Sovereign Mission which,
from the first beginning of the world's history, has been
in prophecy assigned to Him.
</p>

<p>
I cannot better illustrate this argument than by recurring
to a deep thought on the subject of Christianity,
which has before now attracted the notice of philosophers
and preachers,<note place='foot'>Fr. Lacordaire and M.
Nicolas.</note> as coming from the wonderful man who
swayed the destinies of Europe in the first years of this
century. It was an argument not unnatural in one who
had that special passion for human glory, which has been
the incentive of so many heroic careers and of so many
mighty revolutions in the history of the world. In the
solitude of his imprisonment, and in the view of death,
he is said to have expressed himself to the following
effect:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='489'/><anchor id='Pg489'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have been accustomed to put before me the examples
of Alexander and Cæsar, with the hope of rivalling their
exploits, and living in the minds of men for ever. Yet,
after all, in what sense does Cæsar, in what sense does
Alexander live? Who knows or cares anything about
them? At best, nothing but their names is known; for
who among the multitude of men, who hear or who utter
their names, really knows anything about their lives or
their deeds, or attaches to those names any definite idea?
Nay, even their names do but flit up and down the world
like ghosts, mentioned only on particular occasions, or
from accidental associations. Their chief home is the
schoolroom; they have a foremost place in boys' grammars
and exercise-books; they are splendid examples
for themes; they form writing-copies. So low is heroic
Alexander fallen, so low is imperial Cæsar, <q>ut pueris
placeant et declamatio fiant.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But, on the contrary</q> (he is reported to have continued),
<q>there is just One Name in the whole world
that lives; it is the Name of One who passed His
years in obscurity, and who died a malefactor's death.
Eighteen hundred years have gone since that time,
but still it has its hold upon the human mind. It
has possessed the world, and it maintains possession.
Amid the most varied nations, under the most diversified
circumstances, in the most cultivated, in the
rudest races and intellects, in all classes of society, the
Owner of that great Name reigns. High and low, rich
and poor, acknowledge Him. Millions of souls are conversing
with Him, are venturing on His word, are looking
for His presence. Palaces, sumptuous, innumerable,
<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/>
are raised to His honour; His image, as in the hour of
his deepest humiliation, is triumphantly displayed in
the proud city, in the open country, in the corners of
streets, on the tops of mountains. It sanctifies the ancestral
hall, the closet, and the bedchamber; it is the
subject for the exercise of the highest genius in the
imitative arts. It is worn next the heart in life; it is
held before the failing eyes in death. Here, then, is One
who is <emph>not</emph> a mere name, who is not a mere fiction,
who is a reality. He is dead and gone, but still He
lives,&mdash;lives as the living, energetic thought of successive
generations, as the awful motive-power of a thousand
great events. He has done without effort what others
with life-long struggles have not done. Can He be less
than Divine? Who is He but the Creator Himself;
who is sovereign over His own works, towards whom our
eyes and hearts turn instinctively, because He is our
Father and our God?<note place='foot'>Occas. Serm., pp. 49-51.</note></q>
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Here I end my specimens, among the many which
might be given, of the arguments adducible for Christianity.
I have dwelt upon them, in order to show how
I would apply the principles of this Essay to the proof
of its divine origin. Christianity is addressed, both as
regards its evidences and its contents, to minds which
are in the normal condition of human nature, as believing
in God and in a future judgment. Such minds it addresses
both through the intellect and through the
imagination; creating a certitude of its truth by arguments
too various for enumeration, too personal and deep
<pb n='491'/><anchor id='Pg491'/>
for words, too powerful and concurrent for refutation.
Nor need reason come first and faith second (though this
is the logical order), but one and the same teaching is in
different aspects both object and proof, and elicits one
complex act both of inference and of assent. It speaks
to us one by one, and it is received by us one by one, as
the counterpart, so to say, of ourselves, and is real as we
are real.
</p>

<p>
In the sacred words of its Divine Author and Object
concerning Himself, <q>I am the Good Shepherd, and I
know mine, and Mine know Me. My sheep hear My
voice, and I know them, and they follow Me. And I
give them everlasting life, and they shall never perish;
and no man shall pluck them out of My hand.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='492'/><anchor id='Pg492'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Note.</head>

<p>
1. On the first publication of this volume, a Correspondent did
me the favour of marking for me a list of passages in Chillingworth's
celebrated work, besides that which I had myself quoted,
in which the argument was more or less brought forward, on
which I have animadverted in ch. vii. § 2, p. 226. He did this
with the purpose of showing, that Chillingworth's meaning,
when carefully inquired into, would be found to be in substantial
agreement with the distinction I had myself made between
infallibility and certitude; those inaccuracies of language into
which he fell, being necessarily involved in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>argumentum ad
hominem</foreign>, which he was urging upon his opponent, or being the
accidental result of the peculiar character of his intellect, which,
while full of ideas, was wanting in the calmness and caution
which are conspicuous in Bishop Butler. Others more familiar
with Chillingworth than I am must decide on this point; but I
can have no indisposition to accept an explanation, which deprives
controversialists of this day of the authority of a vigorous and
acute mind in their use of an argument, which is certainly
founded on a great confusion of thought.
</p>

<p>
I subjoin the references with which my Correspondent has
supplied me:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
(1.) Passages tending to show an agreement of Chillingworth's
opinion on the distinction between certitude and infallibility
with that laid down in the foregoing essay:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. <q>Religion of Protestants,</q> ch. ii. § 121 (vol. i. p. 243,
Oxf. ed. 1838), <q>For may not a private man,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<pb n='493'/><anchor id='Pg493'/>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 152 (p. 265). The last sentence, however, after
<q>when they thought they dreamt,</q> is a fall into the
error which he had been exposing.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 160 (p. 275).
</p>

<p>
4. Ch. iii. § 26 (p. 332), <q>Neither is your argument,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 36 (p. 346).
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 50 (p. 363), <q>That Abraham,</q> &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
7. Ch. v. § 63 (vol ii. p. 215).
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 107 (p. 265).
</p>

<p>
9. Ch vii. § 13 (p. 452).
<hi rend='italic'>Vide</hi> also vol. i. pp. 115, 121, 196, 236, 242, 411.
</p>

<p>
(2.) Passages inconsistent with the above:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. Ch. ii. § 25 (vol. i. p. 177). <hi rend='italic'>An argumentum ad hominem.</hi>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 28 (p. 180).
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 45 (p. 189). <hi rend='italic'>An argumentum ad
hominem.</hi>
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 149 (p. 263). <hi rend='italic'>An argumentum ad
hominem.</hi>
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> § 154 (p. 267). Quoted in the text, p. 226.
</p>

<p>
6. Ch. v. § 45 (vol. ii. p. 391). He is arguing on his
opponent's principles.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
2. Also, I have to express my obligation to another Correspondent,
who called my attention to a passage of Hooker
(<q>Eccles. Pol.</q> ii. 7) beginning <q>An earnest desire,</q> &amp;c., which
seemed to anticipate the doctrine of Locke about certitude. It
is so difficult to be sure of the meaning of a writer whose style is
so foreign to that of our own times, that I am shy of attempting
to turn this passage into categorical statements. Else, I should
ask, does not Hooker here assume the absolute certainty of the
inspiration and divine authority of Scripture, and believe its
teaching as the very truth unconditionally and without any
admixture of doubt? Yet what had he but probable evidence as
a warrant for such a view of it? Again, did he receive the
Athanasian Creed on any logical demonstration that its articles
were in Scripture? Yet he felt himself able without any misgiving
to say aloud in the congregation, <q>Which faith except
every one do keep whole and undefiled, <emph>without doubt</emph> he shall
perish everlastingly.</q> In truth it is the happy inconsistency of
his school to be more orthodox in their conclusions than in their
premisses; to be sceptics in their paper theories, and believers in
their own persons.
</p>

<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/>

<p>
3. Also, a friend sends me word, as regards the controversy on
the various readings of Shakespeare to which I have referred
(<hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, ch. viii. §1, p. 271) in illustration of the shortcomings
of Formal Inference, that, since the date of the article in the
magazine, of which I have there availed myself, the verdict of
critics has been unfavourable to the authority and value of the
Annotated Copy, discovered twenty years ago. I may add,
that, since my first edition, I have had the pleasure of reading
Dr. Ingleby's interesting dissertation on the <q>Traces of the
Authorship of the Works attributed to Shakespeare.</q>
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
